


















































May 3, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 53A  THURSDAY, MAY 3, 2018, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4183 
 May 3, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great 
privilege to introduce a number of people from Milestone and 
also a couple from Estevan that are seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s Michael and Jennifer Brown and their two 
sons, Carter and Finley; as well as Jennifer’s mom and dad, 
Paul and Cheryl Deren, from Estevan, as I’d mentioned. Also 
Michael’s mom and dad, Jan and Bill Brown, are here from 
Milestone; and also cousins, Brennan and Emily Brown. If you 
could wave; thank you all for waving. 
 
I just want to just say a little bit about this family. I will have a 
member’s statement regarding the achievements of Carter in 
members’ statements, but I want to talk quickly about the 
Brown family as a whole. You know, I don’t think there are too 
many communities that are successful communities without 
strong leadership. And certainly the Brown family has been that 
strong leadership in the Milestone community for generations, 
and continue to be a real leadership family in that community. 
 
I, a number of years ago, used to play hockey against 
Milestone, and I don’t know how many games. That Bill and 
his brother Bernie alliance, they were blind when I played 
against them, but they sure got a lot better eyesight once I 
started playing with Milestone. But certainly have been an 
instrumental family. 
 
And also Jan who is a Missal from the Lang community, the 
Missals were instrumental in that community and have done so 
much for both of those communities. I want to thank them for 
being such role models for their four boys that are presently in 
and around the Milestone-Lang area, for the role models that 
they have been and for the contribution that they have given. 
It’s what makes rural Saskatchewan rural Saskatchewan, is 
families like these. 
 
Would all members please welcome the Deren family from 
Estevan, and the Brown family from Milestone. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose 
Jaw-Wakamow. 
 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you and to all members of the House, I want to 
introduce somebody very special to me. As the majority of us 
have that special someone at home, I have my wonderful bride, 
Marjorie, sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. So I’d like to 
welcome her to her House, my much better half. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to introduce 
to you 24 grade 7 and 8 students from Hillmond Central School, 
just north of Lloydminster, sitting in the west gallery today. 
They are accompanied by their teachers, Shaun Hart and Sarah 
Brake; and chaperones, Jessie White, Rhonda Kastendieck, and 
Melissa Winter. And of course, one of the most important 
people is the bus driver. Raymond Young — who got them here 
safely and, as I understand, is well known to some as Happy — 
is with us here today. 
 
They met with me this morning, Mr. Speaker, and we had some 
great questions asked and had a great discussion. They are 
touring our capital city and then going on to visit the great city 
of Moose Jaw and see the highlights there. So I’d ask all 
members to join me in welcoming them here today in their 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I, 
too, want to join the member from Lloydminster in recognizing 
the group from Hillmond. I remember it was many, many years 
ago that, when I was a fairly young lad, I went to play 
volleyball in Hillmond. And of course we lost to the Hillmond 
. . . I can’t remember their name. It’s so long ago. 
 
But anyway, I also wanted to recognize their bus driver, Happy 
Young. Many people may not know this about Happy, but he’s 
my first cousin. And he was an absolute great hockey player 
when he was young, some say better than I, but there was a bit 
of a stretch. 
 
But I want to welcome my cousin to his Legislative Assembly 
and to point out to all the students from Hillmond, you’ve got a 
great bus driver and a great cousin of mine and he’ll take good 
care of you. And again, I join my colleague from Lloydminster 
in welcoming you all to your provincial Legislative Building. 
Thank you. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from the citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we all know that a 
carbon tax does nothing to reduce carbon, and it is a devastating 
blow to our economy. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 



4184 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2018 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Moose Jaw. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens who are 
standing up against this Sask Party’s devastating cut for people 
living with disabilities and for families with children living on 
the tightest of budgets, on the margins, Mr. Speaker, with the 
cut to the Saskatchewan rental housing supplement, a cut that 
certainly defies common sense and lacks any level of basic 
decency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to immediately restore the 
Saskatchewan housing supplement. 
 

These petitions today are signed by concerned citizens from 
Regina. I understand that there’s petitions right across our 
province that are being signed. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present yet again another petition to get big money out 
of Saskatchewan politics. And the people signing this petition 
want to bring to our attention the following: that 
Saskatchewan’s outdated election Act allows corporations, 
unions, and individuals, even those outside this province, to 
make unlimited donations to our province’s political parties. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan 
deserve to live in a fair province where all voices are equal and 
money can’t influence politics. And the federal government and 
the provinces of Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and 
now British Columbia have moved to limit this influence and 
level the playing field by banning corporate and union 
donations to political parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign finance laws 
to end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 
from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 
on individual donations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Regina. Thank you so much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to stand in my place today to present a petition as it 
pertains to Orkambi. Whereas Orkambi is the first drug to treat 
the basic defect in the largest population of Canadians with 
cystic fibrosis. It can slow down disease progression, allowing 
patients to live longer, healthier lives. 
 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Urge the Ministry of Health to negotiate a fair price for 
Orkambi and to make it available throughout the 
Saskatchewan drug plan for those who meet the conditions 
set by Health Canada and the clinical criteria established 
by the CF Canadian clinicians. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve done day after day, presented page after 
page on this petition as it pertains to Orkambi, the people that 
have signed this particular page that I present are from 
Lloydminster, Spruce Home, and Meadow Lake. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Milestone Youth is an Ambassador, Fundraiser, 
and Inventor 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
stand today in the House to acknowledge an incredible young 
man from my constituency. Carter Brown, who I introduced 
earlier, an 11-year-old resident of Milestone, was born with 
osteogenesis imperfecta, or OI, also known as brittle bone 
disease. Mr. Speaker, the National Osteogenesis Imperfecta 
Awareness Week is scheduled around Wishbone Day which is 
this Sunday, which raises awareness of this disease. 
 
When Carter was three weeks old, he was flown to the Shriners 
Hospital for Children in Montreal to receive treatment. He has 
been to the hospital over 50 times since that first visit and has 
become so much more than a patient. Carter is also the Western 
Canadian ambassador for the hospital and a frequent and 
successful fundraiser and inventor. 
 
His most recent endeavour was to develop a splint kit for other 
children who have received treatment for OI. Mr. Speaker, this 
splint kit is designed to stabilize and reduce the pain of a 
fracture while a child is waiting for treatment. This kit is made 
to be mobile, and is about the size of a small backpack and easy 
to apply. Carter’s efforts also raised over $25,000 in 
sponsorship, so he can now provide free kits to 350 patients at 
the hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this splint kit is simply another in a long line of 
truly inspiring and incredible achievements by Carter. So on 
behalf of everybody in the Assembly, I want to thank him for 
all his work, and Michael and Jennifer for all their support in 
his journey. Mr. Speaker, they make us — he makes us — very, 
very proud. Thank you, Carter. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
 



May 3, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4185 

International Day of the Midwife 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday, communities across 
Canada and throughout the world will celebrate the 
International Day of the Midwife. I rise in the House today to 
acknowledge the important role of midwives in our 
communities in the past, in the present, and in the future. The 
care midwives provide to support women, mothers, fathers, 
babies, and families is foundational to healthy communities. 
Midwifery is an important and established profession in our 
country, and in other provinces they’re making great strides to 
advance and promote midwifery. 
 
Unfortunately for families here in Saskatchewan, government 
progress has been slow. Many women aren’t able to choose 
midwifery because there simply aren’t enough midwives 
working in our province. Services are only available in a 
handful of communities across the province, and wait-lists are 
long and many women often can’t choose the type of care that 
they need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, legislation has been in place in our province for 
over 20 years, and we need movement to expand and integrate 
these valuable services. So, Mr. Speaker, I call upon the 
government to take action, and I join families across the 
province in continuing to recognize the contributions of 
midwives to build healthy communities and to celebrate the 
potential to build on this success for all families across 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rochdale. 
 

School Safety Patrol Week 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I rise in this Assembly to acknowledge CAA’s [Canadian 
Automobile Association] School Safety Patrol Week here in our 
province. Student safety is a top priority for all Saskatchewan 
schools. Each year patrollers are trained by CAA Saskatchewan 
with assistance from law enforcement before they can 
participate in the program. 
 
Forty-seven hundred students participate in CAA’s school 
safety program, volunteering their time to keep their peers safe. 
These patrollers not only assist their peers crossing the road 
safely, but they also help students learn about pedestrian, 
traffic, and school-zone safety. These students represent 162 
schools and 70 communities across our province. The Deputy 
Premier had a chance to experience this, helping student 
patrollers Monday morning at St. Peter Elementary School here 
in Regina. 
 
[10:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Chair of CAA Saskatchewan board of 
directors, Suzanne Young, said CAA is proud to manage the 
school safety program that for decades has guided our student 
patrollers to keep our communities safe. She offered her 
genuine thanks to the hard work and volunteer commitment of 
each patroller. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
offering our genuine thanks for the hard work and volunteer 

commitment of each patroller as well. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Jane’s Walks 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m rising today to 
recognize a community-driven event taking place this weekend 
in Saskatoon, May 4th to the 6th. Jane’s Walk is a movement of 
free, volunteer-led walking conversations inspired by Jane 
Jacobs. It encourages people to share stories about their 
neighbourhoods, discover unseen aspects of their communities, 
and use walking as a way to connect with their neighbours. 
 
Jane Jacobs was a writer, urbanist, and activist who championed 
the voices of everyday people in neighbourhood planning and 
city building. The annual Jane’s Walk takes place the first 
weekend in May, which is close to Jane Jacobs’ birthday on 
May 4th. Her first book, The Death and Life of Great American 
Cities, challenged the ideas of modernist city planning and 
offered a new vision of diverse cities made for and by the 
people who live in them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jane’s Walk was founded in 2006 as a living, 
walking commemoration of Jane and her legacy. Ten years later 
in 2016, over 1,000 Jane’s Walks took place in 212 cities 
around the world spanning 36 countries and six continents. 
Since 2012 Jane’s Walk in Saskatoon has been coordinated by a 
small volunteer planning committee. The organization offers a 
website for anyone who wants to lead a walk or join one or 
more walks being offered free of charge. Over the weekend, 14 
different volunteer-led events are taking place in Saskatoon. I 
want to thank all of the volunteers, participants, and sponsors 
for their dedication to making Jane’s Walk such a success. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

Gatsby Night for Autism Held in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I had 
the privilege of attending the Gatsby Night for Autism along 
with the Deputy Premier. The event was hosted by Autism 
Services of Saskatoon, and was held to raise funds for that 
charitable organization. Mr. Speaker, working with a 1920’s 
theme, the event had many unique ways to raise money. 
Attendees could grab a drink at the Gatsby speakeasy, try their 
luck at the casino, or for $20 you could throw your friends in 
jail for 10 minutes. 
 
They called this jail and bail, and the Deputy Premier had his 
opportunity to serve time. It’s ironic that as a lawyer and former 
attorney general, the minister didn’t have some obscure law in 
his back pocket to avoid the clink. He could have called the 
current Attorney General for counsel, but it most likely would 
have led to a flood of donations locking him up for the rest of 
the night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the evening ended up raising over $40,000 for 
Autism Services Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, these funds help 
Autism Services strive towards helping people with autism 



4186 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2018 

reach their full potential, their green light at the end of the dock. 
 
On behalf of this entire Assembly, I would like to thank 
everyone at Autism Services Saskatoon for making this event 
possible and all those who attended and donated to make this 
night a success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Melville Helps Humboldt by Hosting 
Archery Tournament 

 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when Humboldt was overcome by the news of the Broncos bus 
crash, Melville stepped up to help by hosting a school 
provincial archery competition. Humboldt was the intended 
host of the National Archery in Schools Program provincial 
competition April 13th and 14th, but the tragedy that struck that 
community challenged those plans. 
 
The vice-principal of the Melville Comprehensive School, 
Darren Wandy, saw a chance to help and offered Melville as an 
alternate location. The Merv Moore Sportsplex and the Melville 
high school gym played host to nearly 1,000 archery students in 
grades 4 to 12 from across Saskatchewan. 
 
Vice-principal Wandy thanked the city of Melville as well as 
the director of community services, Chris Bruce, for clearing 
the schedule at the Sportsplex so the competition could take 
place. Wandy said the most impressive thing was the sense of 
humanity of people just wanting to make it work. 
 
About 75 people from the Melville area volunteered to ensure 
the competition ran smoothly, including business owners, 
students, parents, even CN rail employees coming off their 
night shift, the air cadets, the Oasis Youth Centre. The Melville 
Lions Club provided food services. Wandy said it was a surreal 
moment to have the community come together and that it was a 
proud moment to be in the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask everyone in this Assembly to join me in 
acknowledging all of those in Melville and surrounding areas 
for stepping up to support our neighbours and reminding us 
what Saskatchewan is all about. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 

Wages, Personal Income Tax, and Affordability 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
members opposite are calling for a $15 per hour minimum 
wage, but the minimum wage is only one part of the income 
discussion. The other part is personal income tax exemption 
limits. We have worked very hard to make sure people have 
more money in their pockets, and that is why we’ve increased 
the personal exemption rate over the last 10 years. We now 
have the second-highest exemption limit in Canada. 
 
People here can earn over $16,000 before they pay any 
provincial tax, up from less than $9,000 in 2007. In 2007 if you 
earned minimum wage, you could keep just 45 per cent of your 
wages before tax kicked in. Ten years later, you were able to 

keep 75 per cent of your wages before paying taxes. 
 
And if you look across the country at provinces with higher 
minimum wages, when it comes to actual disposable income, 
money in your pockets, Saskatchewan remains competitive. In 
fact in many cases, disposable income here is higher, even with 
a lower minimum wage. 
 
And if the members opposite are really concerned about the 
cost of living for our residents, I would call on them to reverse 
their support for a carbon tax. What will be expensive for our 
residents is a tax that will increase the cost of everything from 
food to fuel. And I’m not sure how upstream it is to call for 
increased minimum wages on one hand and then take it all 
away with taxes on the other, Mr. Speaker. But on this side of 
the House, we will continue to defend the interests and future of 
our residents. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Pilot Training Program 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we asked a question 
about the future of pilot training at 15 Wing Moose Jaw. It’s an 
important issue and it was a chance for the government to 
appeal to its base. But instead, the member for Meadow Lake 
appeared to be winging it. He told the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview to call the federal government if she had concerns 
about the future of the program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, pilot training at 15 Wing, the home of the 
Snowbirds, it’s an important program for Moose Jaw and a 
point of pride for our province. But we’ve seen this play out in 
issue after issue. From equalization to funding for education on 
reserve, from rail transport to leadership on climate change, the 
Sask Party government has failed over and over again to deliver 
when it comes to engaging with Ottawa and getting results for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is it not the job of this government to advocate for 
Saskatchewan jobs? When will the Sask Party do its job and 
advocate for pilot training at 15 Wing Moose Jaw? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, that advocating started two 
years ago under the previous premier as he wrote a letter to 
Minister Goodale, Mr. Speaker, asking them to continue with 
the operations in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this raises, you know, a good topic of doing politics 
differently in this House, Mr. Speaker. Because a few weeks 
ago there was a budget introduced here, Mr. Speaker, and 
members opposite asked for increased funding for school 
divisions. Check, Mr. Speaker. That’s been accomplished. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they asked for increased funding to autism 
spectrum disorder, Mr. Speaker, to those in our province, Mr. 
Speaker, to fund autism spectrum disorder to a higher level. 
Check, Mr. Speaker, in this budget. 
 



May 3, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4187 

Mr. Speaker, he called on us to increase funding to CBOs 
[community-based organization], Mr. Speaker, the front lines of 
our services across the province, Mr. Speaker. $10 million into 
those CBO fundings, Mr. Speaker. Check, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He also called on us to fully fund those HIV [human 
immunodeficiency virus] medications to people of the province, 
Mr. Speaker. And I’m happy to say that this budget is doing just 
that, Mr. Speaker. And I ask the members opposite, let’s do 
politics differently. Let’s support the budget when we get the 
opportunity here. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Support for Indigenous Education 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The government likes 
to pick fights with the federal government, but their track record 
in winning those fights is abysmal. We’ve long known that First 
Nations children receive significantly less funding for education 
than those living off-reserve, that a child at Goose Lake primary 
school who’s struggling — needs a little extra attention — can’t 
expect the same supports that a child at Grenfell Elementary 
can. We’ve repeatedly called on this government to take the 
fight to Ottawa and to make this right. The minister has said 
there’s ongoing conversation on this injustice, but they’ve been 
saying that for years with no sign of any action. 
 
Will the Premier stand up and tell the federal government that 
every Saskatchewan child deserves a good education and a 
chance to succeed? Or will we see another school year go by 
while the conversations go on and on? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, this feels remarkably like 
federal question period. But, Mr. Speaker, the answer to his 
question about access to education in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, is yes. And we have made great strides across this 
province to ensure that we are increasing our grad rates, Mr. 
Speaker, our on-time grad rates in communities across this 
province, Mr. Speaker, First Nations or non-First Nations. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, is it was in this province, 
in this province where treaty education was first mandated into 
our curriculum, Mr. Speaker. And it’s in this province now, 
since 2011-2012 year, Mr. Speaker, we’re up some 20 per cent 
in our grad rates with our First Nations and Métis individuals 
across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We continue to work with our federal government, whether it 
be advocating for 15 Wing Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, or whether 
it be advocating for funding, proper and appropriate funding for 
our First Nations students in communities, Saskatchewan 
communities across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We advocate with the federal government on every opportunity 
that we have to increase the opportunities that we have in this 
province, whether they be in services to the people, Mr. 
Speaker, or whether it would be to broaden and expand our 
economy so that we can have a growing population, Mr. 
Speaker, and attract people and retain people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The First Nations 
education funding gap has been shown to be costing our 
economy a billion dollars a year. Upstream investments in First 
Nations kids improve their lives, their opportunities. They also 
improve opportunities for people all across the province. This is 
quite simply just the right thing to do to reach out and equalize 
that situation, get rid of that funding gap. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hear about ongoing conversations, but we’ve 
seen no action. So let’s have a timeline. When will these 
communities have more than false hope? When will they 
actually know that they’re going to get the education that their 
kids deserve? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, we take this issue very 
seriously, Mr. Speaker. We continually work to remind the 
federal government of what their responsibility is with respect 
to funding First Nations children and Métis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I spoke to Mr. O’Soup last week, Mr. Speaker, the child 
advocate, and we’ve agreed to work together to continue to 
advance that conversation with the federal government, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ll be sending a joint letter . . . We talked about 
sending a joint letter last week to the federal government to 
remind them. I’m prepared to go to Ottawa, Mr. Speaker, to 
have conversations directly with the minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we are not ignoring this issue. It’s important for the future 
of our children in this province, Mr. Speaker. It’s important for 
our economy. It’s important for the entire province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Global Transportation Hub and 
Government Transparency 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday when asked about 
transparency at the GTH [Global Transportation Hub], the 
minister said, and I quote, “That’s taxpayers’ dollars that are 
being spent there, so I expect and I think all of us expect them 
to be accountable for that and to provide transparency and 
information on that.”  
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can certainly agree with the first part of 
that statement. Over $150 million of taxpayers’ hard-earned 
money spent at the GTH, so Saskatchewan people should 
expect transparency. But that’s not the case. How can the 
minister, after their own leadership candidate says this didn’t 
smell right, after they’ve denied witnesses, after they’ve denied 
documents, and after Sask Party supporters made $11 million, 
how can he still think that the Saskatchewan people can trust 
the Sask Party government to be accountable and transparent 
about the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there is a process, a 



4188 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2018 

process that is being followed with regard to freedom of 
information and access requests all throughout government. 
Elected politicians do not participate in that process. It’s done 
by the staff. Staff make a determination and, Mr. Speaker, we 
don’t know about it till after the fact. Mr. Speaker, we’re not 
going to weigh in to those decisions. We’re going to let those 
processes play out. They can have discussions with the Privacy 
Commissioner with regard to what’s commercially sensitive 
information and what’s not, and we’ll follow up on it after. Mr. 
Speaker, for them to stand up and say, no, we’re doing this right 
now, is something that’s totally inappropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that the members opposite took a tour of 
the GTH. They understand the number of jobs that are being 
created out there. They understand the amount of economic 
activity that comes from that location. And I would like them to 
look at the people out there and say, we support you. 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, just like the land at the GTH, no 
one is buying the minister’s lines about the supposed separation 
between the operations of the GTH and the operations of the 
Sask Party government. 
 
The minister must be forgetting the hundreds of emails between 
the GTH and the Ministry of Highways or the Ministry of 
Economy or Laurie Pushor, the deputy minister. And these 
emails weren’t just for the land flip, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
emails from the GTH directly to the deputy minister to ask him 
to fix immigration issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the GTH is the creation of the Sask Party. And 
much like Dr. Frankenstein, they just can’t walk away from it. 
So can the minister confirm today that they will respect the 
Privacy Commissioner and ensure transparency at the GTH for 
the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there is a process in place. 
We will wait for the process to work its way through. Mr. 
Speaker, the members opposite would like nothing else than to 
have something come from the prosecutions that are taking 
place, the review that is taking place in Manitoba. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
chirps from his seat and wants justice. He wants us . . . That 
member wants us to weigh in to a prosecution that’s being done 
by the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] and by the 
Winnipeg Department of Justice. Mr. Speaker, we’re not going 
there. 
 
They might want to weigh in and go in and do things that are 
totally inappropriate, but on this side of the House we will have 
respect for the rule of law. We’ll have respect for the process 
that’s taking place. And that’s the type of thing that we have 
that is going to make sure that the rights of the citizens of this 
province are protected. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we won’t be taking any advice from the people 
over there on how rights should be respected or how process 
should be followed. If we deviated from the process one bit, 
they would be up on their seats saying no, no, no, you can’t do 
that. Mr. Speaker, they’re going down the wrong path. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Rental Housing Supplement 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Sask Party’s choice to cut the rental 
housing supplement is rightly drawing fire from all sides. The 
Saskatchewan Landlord Association says . . . They’re speaking 
out and they’re calling this cut a short-sighted move. They said, 
“. . . the lack of affordable housing options and financial 
support for those seeking such options, will cause even more of 
a burden on social services.” 
 
But the other night in committee, the minister couldn’t even call 
the cut a cut — a cut of $5 million in the black and white of this 
budget book here this year. He tried to say that there’s federal 
support on its way, which will apparently lessen the blow. But 
it’s just plain wrong to cut support before this federal program 
is in place and that people can be supported. 
 
Will the Sask Party government finally do the right thing and 
will it scrap this mean-spirited and damaging cut? Or at the very 
least will they postpone this cut until the federal program is in 
place? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 
the member for the question. And I want to get again on the 
record, and I’ve said this many times and in committee. There is 
no change in policy for current existing clients that meet the 
criteria for the Sask rental housing supplement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’d also like to get on the record that we invest $46.2 
million in the Saskatchewan rental housing supplement in the 
’18-19 budget. We are working with our federal counterparts to 
be able to make sure that their program suits our needs in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. But the market has changed. We 
have a 9 per cent vacancy rate in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
the highest in Canada. We also have the lowest rental in our two 
major cities, Mr. Speaker. So that combined, we have to look at 
the situation that we’re dealing with right now, Mr. Speaker. 
And for him to say that there is a cut, Mr. Speaker, is 
inaccurate. We have over $46 million invested in this program, 
and we look forward to working with the relationship with our 
clients. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — This is a $5 million cut in the black and 
white in this budget book. For that minister to suggest this isn’t 
a cut, a cut that’ll impact thousands of people and families 
across our province, is absolutely indecent and beneath a 
minister. The minister, the minister talks about rents going 
down but that’s just . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 



May 3, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4189 

The Speaker: — Order. You know, the minister and anybody 
in this House is not indecent. I recognize the member for 
Regina Rosemont, and I caution you. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The minister talks about rents 
apparently going down, but that’s just not the case. In 2005, a 
two-bedroom apartment rented for $607. At the end of 2017, 
that same apartment rented for $1,100. They’ve nearly doubled, 
Mr. Speaker. The need is still there, but the Sask Party 
government is taking away supports because they say statistics 
show that average rents have fallen by — get this — a whole $7 
in one year. And of course the cost of entry-level housing, the 
very housing that those utilizing the rental housing supplement 
are occupying, hasn’t come down at all. 
 
Cutting needed dollars, modest support for those on the tightest 
of margins, is simply not right. Why won’t the Sask Party 
reverse this callous and damaging cut? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to 
continue my answer from the first question, Mr. Speaker, is that 
we also, in addition to that, to the addition to the federal 
program, addition to the highest vacancy rates, we also have 
Sask Housing Corporation. The taxpayers have paid for these 
units, Mr. Speaker. We have over 3,000 of these across the 
province that are currently sitting vacant. We have 700 that are 
in our two major cities, Mr. Speaker, that aren’t being utilized. 
 
If somebody is experiencing some rental challenges, Mr. 
Speaker, I would encourage them to look at Sask Housing as an 
option. We’ve got some very fine units. We’ve got different 
units, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got units for seniors. We’ve got units 
for families. We want to maximize these units, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, what I am very proud of is 
some of the investments that we have made in our budget, in 
our community-based organizations. Unlike the members 
opposite that don’t see social services as an investment, we do 
on this side of the House. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Value and Taxation of Used Vehicles 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have 
recently begun to be hit with some late-onset sticker shock 
when they go to license a used car that they’ve purchased. 
Saskatchewan people are proud bargain hunters, Mr. Speaker. 
When someone gets a deal at the end-of-the-season sale, they 
pay tax on the price they paid, not the sticker price, whatever 
the discount. But when someone goes to buy a used car, Mr. 
Speaker, they find themselves paying hundreds of dollars more 
tax based on its listed value on red book, an auto-valuation 
website that charges money to even see the listed price — and 
that assumes the vehicle is in top condition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance], what’s the true value of a used car — 
what someone pays for the actual car, or what a website 
declares to be the value of an ideal specimen of that car? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — The methodology that’s used to 
determine the PST [provincial sales tax] on a private deal, a 
private sale is no different than what’s being used right across 
all of Canada. It’s no different than what was used by the NDP 
[New Democratic Party] when they had this same policy in 
place. And it’s no different than the methodology that was 
used . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, and it’s no different than 
the methodology that has always been used in this province for 
other registered vehicles and boats, such as motorcycles, heavy 
vehicles, trailers, campers, etc. So it’s the same methodology 
used. A consumer will pay PST on the proportion of the value 
that the consumer uses, and the red book value is a check and 
balance there. It can be appealed. There’s an appeal process. If 
they feel, if the consumer feels that there is additional wear and 
tear and it does not meet the red book value, there is an appeal 
process. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are 
being sold a bill of goods. A $9,500 vehicle taxed at a value of 
14,600. A $6,200 sale taxed at a value of 9,894. People are 
coming forward every day with jaw-dropping stories like these. 
And they’re right; it simply does not seem fair. 
 
What does someone consider when they’re buying a used car? 
Of course, the make and model, Mr. Speaker, and the mileage. 
Also other conditions of the car. Is there rust? Are there holes in 
the upholstery? The red book value of the vehicle doesn’t 
reflect these crucial factors in determining the value of a car. 
And that same car, that same car, Mr. Speaker, if it’s written 
off, won’t be reimbursed by SGI at the inflated value. 
 
So my question for the Minister of SGI, Mr. Speaker: what 
exactly is being taxed here? A car that may have spent years 
navigating Saskatchewan highways and grid roads, or an ideal 
version of that car that sat its whole life in a garage? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I’ll repeat the 
answer. This is the methodology that was used previously when 
there was PST on used vehicles. It’s the methodology used 
across entire Canada. It’s the methodology that we’ve always 
used for heavy vehicles, for boats, for trailers, for campers, for 
motorcycles. It’s not different than what we’ve always been 
using, which is the red book value. It can be appealed, and the 
appeal process is very reasonable. If there is rust and wear and 
tear over and above, that the consumer can say this is why he 
feels that the vehicle is worth less, that will be looked at, and 
the PST will be returned. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 



4190 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2018 

Minister’s Comments and Provincial Budget 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, just before introducing the 
budget, the Finance minister made a very troubling assertion. 
She told a reporter that math skills are “not necessarily always 
typically the female strength.” Mr. Speaker, it’s 2018 and the 
minister should know better. Women and girls can do math and 
don’t need to hear these outdated tropes about what they can 
and cannot do, repeated by members of cabinet. 
 
Doesn’t she think women can do math just as well as men can? 
Will the Finance minister apologize for these comments? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, a surprising question. 
Nonetheless, Mr. Speaker, I was very proud, very proud in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker, the very first budget to be released by a 
woman on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The third female Finance minister, Mr. Speaker, in the history 
of the province. The second to deliver a budget. As I said, the 
first for this party and for this government, Mr. Speaker. And it 
makes me extremely proud — and I think all of us extremely 
proud — not only of the member from Humboldt, not only of 
our Finance minister, Mr. Speaker, but all of the female people 
in our caucus, in this building, Mr. Speaker, and across the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would commend this female Finance minister for the 
budget that she introduced about a month ago, Mr. Speaker. I 
would commend her for the investments in the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. The investments that people expect 
in our communities’ most vulnerable, the investments in health 
care, both in infrastructure and people, Mr. Speaker. The 
investments that the people of the province have asked for, Mr. 
Speaker. And we’re proud of this Finance minister and this 
budget. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, women leaders need to inspire 
young girls. I hope that she will apologize to them for that 
comment. Now when you look over what’s happened in our 
province . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When you look at 
what’s happened in our province over the last 10 years, it’s not 
women and girls who struggle with managing numbers. It’s the 
Sask Party government. 
 
They’re the ones on track to triple the debt. They’re the ones 
who watched over the fiscal mess that continues to grow at the 
GTH. And they’re the ones who were at the helm as the costs at 
the Regina bypass spun out of control from $400 million to over 
$2 billion, all the while taking more out of the pockets of 
families with hikes to the PST and our SaskPower bills. If 
there’s anyone in Saskatchewan with a math problem, it’s the 

Sask Party cabinet. 
 
How can the Finance minister cast aspersions on others, when 
it’s her government that keeps piling on debt and piling tax 
hikes and fee hikes on to Saskatchewan families? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — You know, I would challenge the 
member opposite to just say what she said in this House to my 
three daughters and whether or not I’ve been an example to 
them. 
 
[10:45] 
 
However, you know what, Mr. Speaker? We are the 
government that has reduced expenses for families across this 
province. We have 112,000 residents in Saskatchewan, 
low-income residents, that have . . . taken off the tax roll 
entirely. That’s what this government’s been able to do. Mr. 
Speaker, this government has been able to have one of the 
lowest personal income tax in our entire country, one of the 
lowest corporate income tax, one of the lowest small business 
tax in our country. We are very competitive. Our debt-to-GDP 
[gross domestic product] is the third-lowest in our country and 
we’re on track to balance. That is something we can be proud 
of, unlike the members opposite who want to have a carbon tax 
and they have promises worth $2.5 billion that they have no 
idea how they would pay for. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Domestic Violence Legislation 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, this week the minister told 
reporters he’s hoping the domestic violence death review 
panel’s final report will be released in the next two weeks. 
Considering the report was anticipated in the fall of 2017, we 
really hope that is the case. People fleeing interpersonal 
violence shouldn’t have to wait any longer for the support they 
need. Can the minister commit today that we will see the review 
panel’s final report before the end of the spring sitting, so it 
could be fully canvassed by members in this Assembly without 
further delay? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the process is independent. 
I’m told that it should be done soon. My undertaking is that as 
soon as it’s received and ready to go we’ll certainly want to be 
releasing it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I appreciate very much the issues that the member 
opposite raises. Domestic violence is something that’s simply 
unacceptable in our province or anywhere else. Mr. Speaker, we 
have made provisions in our legislation to allow a person that’s 
a victim of domestic violence to break a residential lease. 
We’ve passed, or have before the House, legislation that will 
allow for 10 unpaid days for victims and families so that they 
can access services. Mr. Speaker, we don’t want to wait for the 
outcome of that report, but we’ll certainly want to look at it and 
do whatever we think is appropriate coming out of that to try 



May 3, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4191 

and add to the supports that are there. 
 
We’re also doing consulting right now on Clare’s Law, as I 
mentioned earlier, which will give the police an opportunity to 
provide information to a person that’s a potential victim, so that 
hopefully violence can be avoided. We’ve also worked with the 
federal government to provide legal advice for a two-year 
period, and we’re going to continue to do that type of thing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I understand that the panel’s 
good work has been concluded, and it’s waiting for approval 
from that minister and that cabinet. This government is in a 
holding pattern, refusing to establish better supports until this 
report is approved. Other jurisdictions have been providing 
more support for survivors and we should be following their 
lead, not implementing half measures. 
 
Given Saskatchewan’s distinction as the province with the 
highest rates of interpersonal violence, we should be going 
above and beyond. If the panel’s final report includes 
recommendations such as longer unpaid leaves and paid days 
off, will the minister come to the table and finally agree to 
implement those recommendations and pass our private 
member’s bill, Bill 609? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll obviously look at the 
report and we’ll take the recommendations seriously. Mr. 
Speaker, some of the things that we have done already: we’ve 
committed $11.4 million a year to support for interpersonal 
violence programs and abuse services; we also have opened the 
first transition house in Saskatchewan since 1989. In 16 years of 
NDP government, they did not open transition houses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve done that. We’re going to continue to do 
that type of thing, and I have a long list of transition houses that 
receive funding every year in this province. We’re going to 
continue to make those supports. They’re necessary and, Mr. 
Speaker, I appreciate the question the member is asking and 
we’ll continue to work. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 242 through 244. 
 
The Speaker: — Order 242 to 244. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 245 through 249. 
 
The Speaker: — Tabled 245-249. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Government’s Commitment to Innovation  
 
Mr. Olauson: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’m proud to once again stand in my place to speak about small 
businesses here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But first I feel the need that I need to thank a few people here in 
our caucus office. We’ve got Hayley. We’ve got Paula. I forget 
the young fellow’s name. Callan. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Well that’s a first, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
We’ve got Paula and Hayley and Callan and Lee and John and 
Karalee in our caucus office providing us research each and 
every day here. Helps us do our jobs a lot better. And contrary 
to what the member from Saskatoon Centre thinks, the quality 
of research has only gone up. It’s not declining. And we’re very 
thankful for the work that they do in our office here. And I just 
wanted to give them a shout-out before we start. 
 
So I’m proud to once again stand in my place and support small 
businesses here in our province. And we should all support our 
small businesses here. I’ve stood many times to highlight how 
small business is the backbone of our economy and how many 
people are employed by those entrepreneurs who take a risk, put 
their own money on the line, and work their fingers to the bone 
to provide valuable services we all need in this province. 
 
Saskatchewan is blessed with thousands of entrepreneurs, and 
we reap the fruits of their labour through their contributions to 
health, social services, and education. Small business accounts 
for over 98 per cent of the businesses in Saskatchewan. We 
have more small businesses per capita than anywhere else in 
Canada. That’s why our government has invested in them, 
removed red tape, and raised the exemption for small 
businesses up to $600,000 just this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Saskatchewan technology start-up incentive program 
actually has its roots in another program started not quite a year 
ago. Co.Labs launched in June of 2017. I was there with the 
premier and other colleagues because we all saw what this had 
the potential to become. I’ve been there many times since, 
talking with tech companies — actually mostly listening to 
those tech companies and their leaders — talking with their 
mentors, and listening to the sponsors of their various events. 
 
It’s quite the place, Mr. Speaker, and I would encourage all in 
this Assembly to make the trip to the University of 
Saskatchewan and Saskatoon University constituency, the best 
in the province by the way, and Innovation Place to see what 
Co.Labs is all about. It’s a part of a strategy to have our 
entrepreneurs with their fantastic ideas graduate from here, 
grow their ideas here, and provide people with employment 
right here in Saskatchewan. 
 



4192 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2018 

This is something unfamiliar to the NDP. There’s nothing ad 
hoc about this program, as the member from Saskatoon Centre 
claimed yesterday. When he spoke about elephants in the room, 
I can only assume he was referring to many of the failed 
ventures of the past from the NDP, like Retx.com or Clickabid 
or mega bingo, and oh so many more, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday 
the member from Saskatoon Centre said, and I quote: 
 

Excellent idea, but what happens once you’ve got it up and 
running? You have to maintain it. You have to maintain it. 
And this is where this government falls short, and that’s 
why so often start-ups start to look around, around Canada, 
around the world: where can we go to get the kind of 
support that we need to make things really work and so 
they can be sustainable? 

 
Mr. Speaker, wrong. They don’t say that, not the ones that I’ve 
consulted with or listened to. They don’t say that at all, Mr. 
Speaker. It sounds like the member from Saskatoon Centre 
wants to own those businesses. Not just give them a tool to help 
them raise private capital, but buy them and own them and 
operate them and probably unionize them, like PotashCorp, like 
Big Sky Farms, and our famous SPUDCO [Saskatchewan 
Potato Utility Development Company]. They don’t understand 
business over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But unlike those failures, this incentive program will create the 
conditions for continued rapid growth and success of newly 
emerging technology companies. This incentive will further 
strengthen the province’s innovation strategy by helping to 
retain technology start-ups in Saskatchewan. Every jurisdiction 
in Western Canada has this form of investment program. 
 
Jordan Dutchak, executive director of Co.Labs, says: 
 

The current size of Saskatchewan’s private capital pool 
coupled with a lack of investor incentive programs has 
made it difficult for early-stage technology start-ups to 
acquire the capital they need to launch and scale their 
businesses.  
 
The STSI will create greater access to capital in the 
province, leading to better retention of entrepreneurial 
talent and skilled labour. Historically Saskatchewan has 
been the only jurisdiction in Western Canada that did not 
offer a start-up investment tax incentive.  
 
As such, the establishment of this program will allow the 
province to effectively participate in the increasingly 
competitive area of innovation commercialization in 
Canada, as well as attract and retain talent and investment 
in the province.  

 
Saskatchewan has a growing technology sector. It employees 
about 5,000 people and, according to Statistics Canada, it 
contributes $1.45 billion to our province’s economy. But the 
tech sector identified that the number one barrier to success is 
the access to private capital. Saskatchewan must be 
opportunistic and cost competitive across all innovation sectors 
to facilitate greater investment and entrepreneurship outcomes. 
 
Removing the barriers to securing early-stage investment or 
angel investment is critical to our province at this stage because 

these companies outperform non-angel-backed companies in 
sales growth, employment growth, wages paid, research and 
development expenditures, and profits. They tend to employ 
highly skilled workers, and they grow entrepreneurial talent and 
management expertise and often spur spinoff companies and 
economic activity. I also heard that, Mr. Speaker. I heard that 
over and over again when I was listening to these technology 
companies. 
 
The STSI [Saskatchewan technology start-up incentive] will 
help to address a significant barrier to the continued rapid 
growth of companies and economic activity. The STSI will help 
to address a significant barrier to the continued rapid growth of 
Saskatchewan’s tech sector, the shortage of capital available for 
early-stage tech start-ups. To qualify for the program, eligible 
technology-based start-ups must be located in Saskatchewan. 
They must also have 50 employees or fewer, with at least half 
of those employees located in our province. 
 
The program also has the support of Saskatchewan’s investor 
community, which has been requesting an angel investment tax 
credit for several years. The STSI will help up to 30 start-ups 
over the two-and-a-half-year pilot program. At least $5 million 
of private investment will be leveraged by this program. This 
pilot program will offer a 45 per cent non-refundable tax credit 
for individual and corporate equity investments in eligible 
technology start-up businesses, capped at a maximum annual 
benefit of $140,000 per investor. 
 
The Saskatchewan technology start-up incentive will be 
managed by Innovation Saskatchewan and will be funded 
through the agency’s $7.2 million surplus funds, which will 
support tax expenditures and program administration. 
Innovation Saskatchewan will be working closely as well with 
the Ministry of Trade and Export Development. 
 
So what does this all mean, Mr. Speaker? We’ve been hearing 
for years about how our technology companies are hurting for 
capital. Here’s some facts right from the people who this 
incentive will help the most. Since Co.Labs was founded in 
2017, there have been 37 jobs created by the companies in the 
incubator. They project that they will double that and hire 40 
more. Private investment has topped $3.35 million. Ninety-two 
companies applied to join the program and 30 have been 
accepted. They average about five or 5.3 months in the Co.Labs 
program. 
 
And right now there is over $5 million in the private capital 
investment pipeline. This angel tax credit will help that money 
move from investors to the companies that will be creating jobs 
for the future. Companies like Townfolio, Mr. Speaker, who 
started a couple of years ago. Townfolio was a trusted 
community profile network used by municipalities and 
businesses to access hard-to-find public data and discover local 
opportunities across the country. 
 
[11:00] 
 
Companies like SalonScale, Mr. Speaker. This software uses 
Bluetooth scales to measure the exact cost of each hair colour 
bowl to allow for a more consistent bottom line at hair salons. 
Here’s what Alicia Soulier, the owner of SalonScale said about 
the STSI and I quote: 



May 3, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4193 

Over the last year I have taken my start-up, SalonScale 
Technology, from a single idea to a fully functional 
product. Since the beginning, I have self-funded and 
bootstrapped my venture to a point where we had a product 
ready to take to potential investors. Over this last month 
we have successfully raised $150,000 in funding from 
angel investors, all of which reside in Saskatchewan. 

 
Companies like SafetyTek, Mr. Speaker, a platform that 
automatically enforces a company’s safety program by tracking 
user activity in real time, creating accountability throughout 
their workforce. At a time when safety is a very big piece of 
what companies do every day, Mr. Speaker, it would be 
unfortunate that this great idea would be left behind simply for 
a lack of private capital. 
 
Ryan Quiring, president and CEO [chief executive officer] of 
SafetyTek says: 
 

In the early days of a tech entrepreneur’s journey to 
commercialization, there is s phase commonly known as 
the valley of death. In this phase, entrepreneurs and 
start-ups often struggle to grow past a certain point as they 
lack the sales traction necessary to attract outside 
investment from angel investors and venture capitalists. As 
a result, many start-ups plateau and are surpassed by their 
competition.  
 
In developing markets and tech communities like 
Saskatchewan, incentives such as the STSI allow start-ups 
to compete with those in larger centres that traditionally 
have access to larger capital pools, and in doing so, enable 
the start-ups to circumvent the valley of death altogether. 

 
I could go on and on about the number of companies that will 
benefit from this program, but I think we’re starting to see the 
big picture. 
 
Money isn’t the only thing these young start-up entrepreneurs 
need, Mr. Speaker, and Co.Labs is providing that mentorship as 
well. Co.Labs is run by a board of directors. Now on that board, 
Mr. Speaker, is a number of successful technology 
entrepreneurs who are more than willing to give up their time to 
help up-and-comers navigate the path from a great idea to a 
best-in-class business. 
 
People like Jacqueline Cook, CSO [chief strategy officer] of 
Vendasta Technologies; Jeff Dyck, director of engineering at 
Mentor Graphics; Katherine Regnier, CEO of Coconut 
Calendar; Greg Sutton, CEO of TinyEye Therapy Services; Ian 
Meier, CEO of Bitstrata Systems; and then there’s Wes Jickling 
and Kari Harvey from Innovation Saskatchewan. 
 
While the STSI is in itself a huge help to making these new, 
small, but innovative and disruptive companies grow into 
something more, without support and mentoring some of these 
companies may very well fall by the wayside. That’s why this 
whole package is very exciting, Mr. Speaker. These young 
entrepreneurs now have the incubator, the mentorship, and the 
capital they need to succeed. This will only make our province 
stronger. 
 
We have our homegrown, successful citizens reaching out and 

spending over 500 hours of their own time helping others who 
need it. We have a space and organization for the bright, young 
minds to spend their time building and expanding their ideas 
while doing it side by side. And now we have the investment 
from the venture capital firms to fund the next big idea. It’s a 
trifecta for success, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But don’t take my word for it. Doug Konkin, Chair of the 
Saskatchewan Capital Network, here’s what he had to say about 
the announcement: 
 

We are confident that this tax credit will give more people 
the incentive required to become investors resulting in 
positive economic spinoffs for the province . . . An Angel 
Investor Tax Credit will encourage more people to invest 
in more companies and that investment will ripple through 
the economy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I hate being in second place. I hate being in third 
place or fourth place as well. When I hear of Waterloo, I think 
of Waterloo, Iowa, home of John Deere tractors. I think of the 
Abba song, which I didn’t particularly like, but I think of that 
song. It certainly doesn’t say to me, Mr. Speaker, tech capital of 
Canada, but that’s the word out there, Mr. Speaker. I heard it 
time and again that we’re losing bright, young minds to 
Waterloo of all places. 
 
And I hate that, Mr. Speaker, especially when they tell me that 
they would rather have stayed here. We’ve been there, done that 
before with Alberta in 1990s, Mr. Speaker, and it drives me 
crazy. 
 
So I could go on and on, Mr. Speaker, but I move the following 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly supports the government’s 
commitment to using innovative programs such as the 
Saskatchewan technology start-up incentive and the 
Saskatchewan value-added agriculture incentive to support 
businesses and entrepreneurship in our province. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
University has moved: 
 

That this Assembly supports the government’s 
commitment to using innovative programs such as the 
Saskatchewan technology start-up incentive and the 
Saskatchewan value-added agriculture incentive to support 
businesses and entrepreneurship in our province. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Good to take my place in this Assembly, rise and join debate on 
the 75-minute motion. And again, in terms of just to get this 
squarely in sight here, Mr. Speaker, wherein the government 
moves: 
 

That this Assembly supports the government’s 
commitment to using innovative programs such as the 



4194 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2018 

Saskatchewan technology start-up incentive and the 
Saskatchewan value-added agriculture incentive to support 
businesses and entrepreneurship in our province. 

 
I guess whenever I see a motion like this, a thought occurs to 
me, Mr. Speaker, that, you know, in terms of . . . It’s sort of like 
having a motion that you’re a carpenter and you want to put 
forward a motion that you think the hammer’s a great tool or 
the saw is a great tool. And, you know, well sure, Mr. Speaker, 
absolutely. If the hammer’s being used to build things, if it’s 
being used in a good way, Mr. Speaker, then of course that’s 
something that I’m sure we can all get behind, you know, and 
congratulations for that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the way that motions like this 
come forward and, you know, what are good incentives or good 
policy tools or good programs, Mr. Speaker, the way that those 
motions are to be evaluated, Mr. Speaker, or considered, it’s 
hard to do that separate from the way that the government has 
used similar tools in past or that they’ve used similar measures 
in the current budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again in terms of, you know, using different tax incentives to 
incent growth within the technology sector or within the ag 
value-added sector in and of themselves, Mr. Speaker, no 
problem. Those would seem to be pretty standard parts of the 
policy tool kit. And why wouldn’t a government avail 
themselves of it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
But again in terms of what is the overall record, where there’s 
been a lot of effort made by members opposite over the years to 
talk about how they weren’t in the game of picking winning and 
losers, Mr. Speaker, and the way that they have decried various 
of these types of tools out of hand, Mr. Speaker, at different 
points in their careers, but at the same time when they get 
around to using them, the different sort of misadventures or 
misuses that take place. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the technology start-up credit, Mr. 
Speaker, again in and of itself a great thing. But it does bring to 
mind what happened with SkipTheDishes, where you had a 
great start-up in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, that was a success and 
was going places and that, you know, had been advantaged by 
different things in terms of the infrastructure put in place. 
 
I think of, again we’ve talked about Innovation Saskatchewan 
and the funds that the government has oversight there, because 
of course it’s a board that is appointed by those members. And 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, they have certainly significant 
representation on that board, chaired by the Minister 
Responsible for Innovation Saskatchewan. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, one of the previous ministers to occupy 
that particular position was none other than Bill Boyd, so in 
terms of different approaches to innovation over the years, we 
can imagine what various initiatives and, you know, how that 
all worked out. But again there’s some great people there doing 
good work and some great tools being deployed throughout the 
sector for people to avail themselves of, to grow their 
businesses, grow technologies, and in terms of our economy, 
Mr. Speaker, we all benefit. 
 
But where it gets off the rails, Mr. Speaker, is with again, in the 

case of SkipTheDishes, you know, putting . . . It was $3 million 
where it started and there was some backtracking from that. But 
there was also an election coming on in terms of the need for 
that to fill up the big announcement calendar. And in terms of 
what was brought to bear for dollars for that organization, Mr. 
Speaker, that was back and forth and there was a significant 
amount of hue and cry in the public as to, you know, is this 
really what those dollars were intended for? And then of course, 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of the way that the entity was bought out 
and left town, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of these kind of investments, I think the people of 
Saskatchewan rightfully ask, you know, are you making an 
investment that is for the benefit of the people of 
Saskatchewan? It certainly is a helpful tool for that 
organization. But what sort of safeguards do you have in place 
to make sure that the investment isn’t made and then a profit 
realized by the entrepreneurs, and then they leave town and 
leave the province, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I think the people of Saskatchewan rightfully look at different 
investments like this and say, what are the guarantees in terms 
of the return on our particular investment? So those are 
questions that, in terms of the way that’s played out through 
different circumstances over the years, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has a bit of a checkered past on that front, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And in terms of the technology start-up incentive, that in and of 
itself has gone through a number of permutations over the 
years. And again we’ll be watching closely to see how this 
works out because we don’t have any particular problem with 
targeted incentives, Mr. Speaker, where, you know, it’s filling a 
gap in the investment environment and brings to bear those 
critical venture capital dollars, Mr. Speaker. That’s not a 
problem. But again it goes back to the tool analogy. It’s what 
you do with any given tool, Mr. Speaker. And if you’re using 
that hammer to help build something, then great. But if you’re 
using the hammer to smash things or to create damage in a 
sector, Mr. Speaker, you should put down the hammer. 
 
When it comes to the value-added ag incentive again, Mr. 
Speaker, diversifying the ag sector is older, I would submit, in 
terms of a pursuit, than the province itself, Mr. Speaker. It’s as 
old as agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan. So again, 
that we would set out some policy tools to try and diversify 
what’s happening in the ag sector, we don’t have a particular 
problem with that, I would submit. 
 
But we are seized with different questions in terms of what the 
. . . why was the threshold set where it was set? What is the 
anticipated benefit in terms of generated economic activity? 
What is the anticipated benefit in terms of jobs, Mr. Speaker? 
And how does that attach to the Saskatchewan economy and the 
Saskatchewan community? And what sort of assurances do we 
have as the people of Saskatchewan that it’s not to be, you 
know, taken of advantage of and then leave the province? 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, I’m not asking these questions because 
I’m some kind of a meanie. I think the people of Saskatchewan 
rightfully look at the way that taxpayer dollars are handled and 
have every right to have those kind of assurances brought to 
bear, Mr. Speaker. There should be confidence in the way that 



May 3, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4195 

those questions will be answered. 
 
So again in terms of the two particular initiatives that are being 
lauded here by the government, certainly there will be more 
discussion of them at the committee stage of those particular 
bills, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll be looking to get that more 
detailed analysis that I would hope has gone on in terms of the 
work of that treasury board, that cabinet, Mr. Speaker. But 
again, when we’ve had other measures come forward, in terms 
of, you know, well what is the projected job benefits, how many 
full-time positions will various efforts create — sometimes it’s 
just been kind of shocking, the lack of detail in terms of the 
analysis that is not being presented in committee. 
 
[11:15] 
 
So again I think these are all fair questions in terms of what is 
the anticipated benefit. What are the projects that are going to 
arise as a result of these measures, Mr. Speaker? How is this 
unique in serving something that is underserved in terms of the 
market? And again, Mr. Speaker, you evaluate all these things 
against other measures and the way that this government has 
decried winners and losers before and all those sorts of things 
— what they did with the film industry, Mr. Speaker, in terms 
of targeted incentives there. But there are a lot of questions that 
arise in terms of how these tools are used by that government. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I sat here, Mr. 
Speaker, listening attentively to the member from Regina 
Elphinstone and a couple of things I picked up. He liked to talk 
about hammers and tools, and I’ll explain these two important 
tools — or hammers, he might call — in a little bit of greater 
detail. 
 
But first I think we need to thank the good people that have 
developed this policy, because I believe these are important 
incentives and it couldn’t be done without the hard work of 
people in the economy that have asked for these tools to be 
provided to the people of Saskatchewan, and also the people 
within government that have crafted, I think, two very 
important incentive programs for our province. And they do 
deserve some credit. 
 
So what kind of provincial economy do we want? One reliant 
on few resources and a large government involvement, like the 
past? Or one driven by innovation and entrepreneurs? We have 
heard the NDP’s position: only government can lead an 
economy. We’ve seen the disaster that was their record: failed 
government ventures in business. A proven better record: an 
approach that is, let business be in business and government 
stay out of the way. 
 
This motion today highlights two important programs to help 
build business and innovation in Saskatchewan. Both are based 
on an idea. If you want to encourage growth in private sector, 
government should take less of a business or investor’s income. 
This is done with a non-refundable tax credit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, past failed governments clouded people’s 

understanding of tax credits when a second type was 
introduced. It was a grant scheme. We are not talking about 
grants or refundable tax credits. Big distinction between the two 
of non-refundable and refundable. The two incentives in this 
motion are for projects that will be generating income. This is 
an important detail that can’t be stressed enough. All too often 
governments in the past have tried to incent growth in sectors 
with non-profitable businesses with grant schemes or equity 
positions with taxpayers’ dollars. Governments have a terrible 
record in business unless it’s a legislated monopoly. 
 
The failed record of NDP ventures in business include . . . Here 
we go. It’s a long list but this is just the partial list: $26 million 
lost in Big Sky Farms, an NDP pig farm; 35 million lost in 
SPUDCO, failed potato company; 15 million in Channel Lake; 
5.6 million in Soft Tracks Enterprises Ltd.; 17.2 lost in 
Coachman Insurance; 40 million lost in Augusta 
Communications, and 2.4 million lost in Business Watch 
International, a pawn shop. 
 
An Hon. Member: — A pawn shop? 
 
Mr. Tochor: — A pawn shop, indeed. I would like to talk 
about the value-added agriculture incentive first. In this 
province, growing our economy is simple. Our astute Premier 
said it best, we need to sell more of what we produce to the 
world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been working. During the last decade of 
growth, our exports have grown by 50 per cent. The next logical 
step is to grow the number more by adding more value to our 
exports, move up the value food chain — rather simple, but 
logical direction that the government can help foster. 
 
It’s interesting to note that that was the NDP government’s goal 
with SPUDCO — right goal, wrong approach. We saw massive 
taxpayers’ dollars invested directly into the potato business, 
with disastrous results. It’s interesting to note if a potato 
operation today made the business decision to expand and add 
value to their crop, through this program, government will take 
less of their income, without any risk of the taxpayer, but we 
would gain the reward of a growing economy with more jobs 
and a higher value-add to our exports. It’s a no-brainer, Mr. 
Speaker. This program will increase investment in our province, 
provide employment, increase our value of exports, and grow 
our economy. Only in the socialists’ world, this would be a bad 
thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about the second program that’s 
mentioned in the motion. It’s the Saskatchewan technology 
start-up Act. This instrument . . . It will be doing this by 
offering a competitive 45 per cent, non-refundable tax credit for 
individuals, corporations, and venture capital corporations 
investing in eligible technology-based start-ups. This will be 
capped at a maximum annual benefit of 140,000 per investor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a growing technology sector. It 
employs over 5,000 people, and according to Stats Canada, 
contributes $1.45 billion to the provincial economy. Our tech 
sector in Saskatchewan is growing. I think it’s one of the most 
overlooked sectors. If we can diversify our economy in this 
direction without risking taxpayers’ dollars, why would the 
NDP be against it? 



4196 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2018 

To better understand the position of the opposition, we just need 
to look at their failed record in tech companies. It’s a different 
list, Mr. Speaker. Once again, the goal was right, the approach 
was wrong. They lost $90 million in Navigata Communications, 
a communications company in BC [British Columbia]. They 
lost 16 million in NST Chicago, a US [United States] Midwest 
fibre optics company. They lost an additional 9.4 million in 
Persona, a Newfoundland cable company. They lost 24 million 
in Retx.com, an Atlanta dot-com company They lost additional 
$3 million in Clickabid, a failed Internet auction business. They 
lost $10 million in Craig Wireless. That’s always puzzled me. Is 
there a Craig in Manitoba that is still in business? Did Craig 
take the $10 million? What happened to Craig’s 
communications wireless? That’s what happens when you put 
taxpayers’ dollars at risk. 8.9 million was also lost in Ag 
Dealer, a farm equipment Internet site. And my favourite of all 
time, the failed mega bingo, $8.5 million — unbelievable. 
 
Why would, Mr. Speaker, would we not want a growing tech 
sector? It diversifies our economy. It’s a non-renewable 
resource. It helps with our economy when we go through the 
natural cycles with commodity prices and the swings that we 
have occurred. Diversifying our economy has been a long-time 
goal of this government, and I would say our past governments 
as well. But once again when the NDP had a chance, the goals 
were the same, but the approach was wrong. 
 
And why is this important, Mr. Speaker, is to have a diversified 
economy that is growing. Well the decade of growth that we 
just experienced tells a story. It tells a story of improved roads 
throughout Saskatchewan, a new bypass in Regina. We’ve been 
able to take the dividends of growth and also reinvest it in our 
health care. If you think the alternative being the NDP closing 
52 hospitals across Saskatchewan, we’re opening hospitals. We 
have the new children’s hospital opening in my hometown of 
Saskatoon. We have the new Saskatchewan Hospital opening in 
North Battleford. We heard . . . Just earlier this week, it was in 
the news about the good work that’s being done in Moose Jaw 
in their new hospital as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another important place that we’ve put additional 
dollars because we had a growing diversified economy is into 
education. We’ve opened over 40 new schools, and that’s what 
you can do with a growing economy versus what the other guys 
faced was a decade of decline. They had to close 176 schools. 
This is why we want a growing economy. 
 
I will be supporting the motion put forward by the member 
from Saskatoon University because I believe Saskatchewan’s 
best days are still to come. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my distinct 
pleasure to rise today and enter into this 75-minute debate. The 
question before us is: 
 

That this Assembly support the government’s commitment 
to innovative programs such as Saskatchewan technology 
start-up incentive and the Saskatchewan value-added 
agriculture incentive to support business and 
entrepreneurship in this province. 

Mr. Speaker, when I saw that motion before us, I thought well, 
maybe there would be some interesting discussion here about 
where our economy is in this province today and what the 
vision for the future might be for this province. Certainly we 
need a vision, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have lagging job 
numbers, in fact record unemployment in this province for the 
first time in over 40 years. We are looking at an unemployment 
rate in this province that is above the national average, certainly 
sluggish GDP growth. And we’re seeing more and more folks 
leaving Saskatchewan to find jobs elsewhere, with some notable 
former members of this Assembly included, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I also thought this was an interesting topic for a debate. 
There’s very little that I think is that contentious on the surface 
here. Supporting innovation, supporting businesses and 
entrepreneurship, Mr. Speaker, certainly is something that we 
can agree with. And finding innovative ways to encourage the 
growth of value-added agriculture and technology in our 
province, I think is something that will be of benefit to people 
in this province, and certainly a vision for what the economy 
looks like going forward is more than necessary. 
 
We are faced globally at this time with some real pressures. We 
look at the increasing automation, and it is important that we 
have tech jobs here in the province, that we have those 
high-knowledge jobs, and that we take our agriculture sector 
that step further that we’re always talking about in this province 
and ensuring diversity and value-added. 
 
So there’s not a lot there, Mr. Speaker, but imagine my 
disappointment when so much of the comments by members 
opposite aren’t looking forward. They’re looking backwards. 
They’re looking back 20, 30, 40 years instead of doing what 
they should be doing, and that is presenting a vision for the 
future in this province. They use the opportunity to, you know, 
bring up issues from years past, Mr. Speaker, and I guess that’s 
maybe where governments get to when they’re nearing the end 
of their reign and are starting to run out of ideas. So I guess 
we’ll cut them a little slack on that. 
 
You know, in terms of some of the things that have been 
mentioned, the Co.Labs at the university, or the Co.Lab at the 
university, 37 jobs and 40 more to, perhaps, to be had. It sounds 
like an interesting idea. I think the larger context there, Mr. 
Speaker, is what this government has done with our universities 
and subjected them to chronic underfunding, unpredictability of 
funding even. We saw two years in a row where this 
government clawed back funding from our universities. 
 
[11:30] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is incredibly short-sighted when you 
think of our need to ensure that we have universities that can 
support students in their learning. We’ve seen cutbacks to 
bursary programs, cutbacks to support programs for parents to 
invest in their children’s education. And on one hand, you 
know, they’re trumpeting the value of some of these programs, 
but on the other hand are really truncating the higher learning 
sector in this province. And that is incredibly, incredibly 
short-sighted. 
 
We, on this side of the House, believe in the talent and the 
ingenuity of Saskatchewan people. I think that goes back, you 



May 3, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4197 

know, prior to Saskatchewan even being a province. And 
there’s no argument about that. But where we do take some 
argument and have some serious concerns is just with regard to 
this government’s track record. They have a track record of 
trotting out big ideas, and some of them may be a little more or 
less thought out than others but then, you know, shying away 
from them and sending different signals to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I look at an article from 2015 from the CBC [Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation], “Evraz invests $200M in Regina 
facility, creates . . . new jobs.” This was an incentive that was 
seen at Evraz. I’m not sure exactly what came of that program, 
Mr. Speaker, but I’m not sure it worked out exactly the way that 
they were hoping. 
 
There was another program that was put forward by this 
government was the oil processing investment incentive, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Again introduced with much fanfare, but I’m 
not sure that the results worked out exactly the way that was 
intended. 
 
We know that the former premier made much of this 
government not picking winners and losers, and as has been 
mentioned by my colleague, then went on to pick the dishes, or 
SkipTheDishes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think we all know 
how that went. I’m looking an interview from 2013 from the 
then premier: 
 

We’ve said, as a government, that we’re not going to . . . 
pick winners and losers. In the past, governments of all 
stripes have used taxpayers’ dollars to provide grants to 
companies, and we’ve found that that just . . . [doesn’t] 
work. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, a few different signals we’ve seen over the 
years from this government with regard to tax credits. Of course 
as I’ve mentioned before, for people in my constituency, they 
certainly did see the benefit and value of a certain tax credit, 
that being the film tax credit. It was one that we, you know, we 
hoped that these incentives worked. We knew that that one was 
working. I’m looking at an article from 2012, Steve McLellan 
the CEO of the chamber of commerce expressed his concern 
about the tax, the film cuts citing that for an investment of just 
over $1 million, the net economic benefit was $44.5 million, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that I think is where we take some exception to the members 
opposite clapping for themselves on this one. Just that they 
don’t always seem to have the ability to carry through on what 
seemed to, perhaps on surface, be good ideas and they have a 
track record of shutting down other tax incentives that had 
already been proven to work. And really a whole industry in our 
province suffered a huge loss at a time when we’re seeing 
record investments in Manitoba and BC. I know that Netflix has 
created a huge soundstage in BC. Saskatchewan is being 
bypassed for that investment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And of course other big ideas like the GTH certainly come to 
mind in terms of this entering into the thought process and 
being a little wary with regard to this government’s ability to 
actually follow through in a way that is effective, that has 
proper oversight, and that ensures that the Saskatchewan people 

are getting the best value for this investment. That’s something 
that we certainly will be looking for. 
 
Again we hope that these programs are successful, that they 
have their intended outcome. But we want to make sure that the 
people of Saskatchewan know how they’ll be evaluated and that 
we are getting, as I said and has been pointed out by the 
Provincial Auditor, a bit of a concern that we’re getting proper 
value for these tax expenditures, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Again, it’s an interesting topic for debate. I suspect it’s maybe a 
little more designed to again clap for themselves and dig up 
their list from the ’70s or ’80s, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I have 
enjoyed the opportunity to enter into this debate, and I thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave to 
introduce some special guests. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Moose Jaw North 
has asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, my 
fellow colleagues. Mr. Speaker, in the west gallery we’ve got a 
group of 50 students from Lindale School in Moose Jaw. It’s 
right in the heart of my constituency. It’s interesting watching 
them. They’re more attentive to the speaking that’s going on 
than the members are, so there could be room for them in the 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Lindale’s a great school. One of the biggest 
programs they have is when they put on their Thanksgiving 
dinner at Thanksgiving time, and they invite all the parents and 
some of the dignitaries, and I’m lucky enough to go there. So 
they work hard, they’re part of the community, and it’s great to 
have them here in the legislative. 
 
I want to welcome them, along with their teachers, Angie 
Milley-Lowe, Mike Wourms, and Allison Shillington. So 
welcome. I’ll ask all members to welcome them. We’re going 
to visit them a little later and answer any questions they have, 
and we’ll look forward to that. So I ask all members to welcome 
them to the legislature. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to join with my colleague to welcome the 
school from Lindale, but also a very special young man in that 
group. His name is Lukas Hetherington. Lukas, can you give us 
a wave? 
 
I’ve known Lukas since he was a little boy. His parents, Jodie 



4198 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2018 

and Mark Hetherington, are pretty well known to many of us 
here. Lukas is already a really accomplished skier, who skis 
competitively on a US team. He finished third overall this past 
season. As a 10-year-old in the 10- to 12-year-old division, he 
already clears 15-foot jumps and can land three 360s in a row, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today is also Lukas Hetherington’s birthday. And as is tradition 
in this House, he’s not sitting here right now, but usually when 
it’s your birthday in this House, the Attorney General and 
Minister of Justice will usually give you a kiss. But you’ll be 
happy to know, Lukas, that I’ve spared you from that. And so I 
would just like my colleagues to join in welcoming you to your 
Legislative Assembly and saying happy birthday to you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — We will now resume the 75-minute 
debate. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Government’s Commitment to Innovation 
(continued) 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and it’s an honour to join in the debate this afternoon. The 
debate states: 
 

That this Assembly supports the government’s 
commitment to using innovative programs such as the 
Saskatchewan technology start-up incentive and the 
Saskatchewan value-added agriculture incentive to support 
businesses and entrepreneurship in our province. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I feel that these are two important 
initiatives moving forward with our government to ensure that 
we can continue to keep a strong economy and allow people to 
come to our province that seek investments so that we can have 
jobs, good-paying jobs for people that can support families 
throughout our province. 
 
And having had the distinct honour to sit on the Innovation 
Sask board for the last six or seven years, I’ve had the 
opportunity to visit Co.Labs when it first opened and see the 
hive of activity in Saskatoon and all these young, bright people 
going forward, bringing their ideas and getting help from other 
community leaders to enable those ideas to come to fruition and 
ensure that they have opportunities to put their ideas down to 
paper, make a business plan, and move forward as a business. 
And I think that’s something important. 
 
And I was listening intently to the member from Lakeview’s 
comments, as I always do, because she usually has a few pearls 
of wisdom in there. And I appreciate her taking her 
commitment to the 75-minute debate seriously, as we all do in 
this House. And I was listening about big ideas going forward. 
She wanted to hear what the Saskatchewan Party government 
wanted to do moving forward into the next decade of growth. 
 
And we do have a growth plan, and I would ask her to take a 
look at that, but then I started thinking about big ideas, big 

initiatives. What has this government done to allow the 
province of Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan to 
have better quality of life? And I wrote a couple down, and I 
remember back a couple of years ago when some of these ideas 
were first brought forward, they weren’t really met with a round 
of applause from the members opposite. 
 
But one of them was — and the former member for Melfort was 
here a couple days ago — STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue 
Society]. Rod Gantefoer was here. And it was a distinct 
pleasure that Rod, when he stepped down from being the 
Finance minister, threw his heart and soul into trying to make 
sure STARS came to Saskatchewan. And we thought it was a 
worthwhile initiative, and I was fortunate enough to be Rod’s 
researcher when we started going around looking at STARS. 
We were able to go to Grand Prairie, Calgary, look at the bases 
there. And it was a good idea coming forward. 
 
And yet there was a couple members opposite that said — and I 
distinctly remember a couple of them and I won’t mention 
them, but they’re not here anymore — Saskatchewan isn’t big 
enough. Why do you need helicopters? We have fixed-wing. 
We have the ground ambulance. Saskatchewan isn’t big 
enough. I remember them saying that, as that big idea moving 
forward, something to help the province — NDP against it. You 
may see a common theme here coming, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I did look back to a couple of different ideas moving forward 
because this is about new ideas. Seventy-five minute debate 
should be about government, opposition members standing up, 
talking new ideas, and making sure that they’re the ideas that 
the people of the province see as being good for their quality of 
life and being able to help make good jobs, build a life in 
Saskatchewan, raise your family, and have a good quality of 
life. 
 
Another one for me, which I think is very important as a Regina 
MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly], is the Regina 
bypass. Time and time again you hear the members opposite 
talking about the Regina bypass, how it ballooned from a $400 
million project to a $1.8 billion project. Two different projects, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Another big idea, another idea that our 
government put forward not simply for . . . but most 
importantly for safety, for the safety of people travelling on 
provincial roads, but also for business, for growth, for truck 
traffic, for making trucks being able to travel around the city of 
Regina safely and more efficient, Mr. Speaker. And as a former 
person in that field, I know that the member from Saskatoon 
Westview appreciates transportation and logistics of how a 
bypass around a major city is good for our province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Another big idea that I know the NDP have talked about, which 
. . . This is a Chamber where we should discuss ideas, but the 
bypass has not been on the top of their list of good things for 
the province. And I do distinctly remember a couple years ago, 
the member from Rosemont got up and every day brought a 
petition about getting truck traffic off of Dewdney. I have not 
heard that petition in years. So just once — and maybe he’ll be 
in the debate — just once be like, you know what, we don’t 
agree on everything but truck traffic is off of Dewdney. Isn’t it, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? I know that’s a good thing for the 
member from Regina Rosemont. 



May 3, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4199 

But they get up and they talk about how big ideas . . . You want 
to hear big ideas, you want to hear ideas, new ideas, for the 
people of the province, like the initiatives talked about in this 
debate. But when new ideas do come up, they’re mostly against 
them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think they call them CAVE 
people, citizens against virtually everything. I think there might 
be a couple over there. I know you hear that on a certain radio 
host’s show every now and then, and you hear a couple of 
permanent callers coming in. 
 
But another big idea project that came forward that was for the 
province of Saskatchewan was the children’s hospital, a 
wonderful initiative in the city of Saskatoon, bringing forward a 
big idea, a program that’s going to help the people of 
Saskatchewan. And they always now are talking about, oh, are 
you going to be able staff it? Do you think you can staff it? I 
don’t think you’re going to get enough people to staff it. 
 
So when the member from Lakeview stands up and says we 
need to talk about big ideas moving forward, every time this 
government’s brought forward a new initiative, a big idea, 
there’s been 9, 12 members standing up against it, which is a bit 
confusing. She’s kind of being a bit counterintuitive right now. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a few more. Doctors and 
nurse recruitment, setting the goal and trying to set a goal to 
recruit more doctors and nurses. This side did set a goal. Policy 
initiative by this government set a goal, and we reached it. I 
remember a former member on that side, Mr. Taylor, said when 
he was asked about why does the new Saskatchewan Party 
government set goals, he’s like, I don’t know. Why would you 
set a goal? What happens if you don’t reach it? 
 
[11:45] 
 
What a flawed logic, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Something where I 
think that’s still . . . A defeatist attitude in this province has 
gone by the wayside because there’s a new optimism in this 
province about growth, about being able to secure a future for 
your families and secure good jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a couple of more big initiatives: the Saskatchewan 
Hospital in North Battleford. A big initiative, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, big initiative, big idea. And I think it’s something that 
will serve the people of the province well. That hospital was 
100 years old. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, 13 new long-term care homes, another big 
initiative. Twenty-one new schools were opened last year, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, 21 new P3 [public-private partnership] schools 
that brought forward new schools that were able for the people 
of the province, the youth of our province to go and ensure that 
they had the opportunity to learn in a fantastic facility, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I know the member for Elphinstone is yelling over, what 
are we talking about? Well when we’re listening to speeches 
from colleagues from either side of the floor, we talk about 
ideas, initiatives, incentives and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is 
what this government is putting forward — new ideas, new 
initiatives, new incentives to attract business to our province, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

And I think when it comes down to it, there aren’t many new 
ideas on the other side of the House. So that’s probably why 
they’re a little upset about having to discuss new ideas in this 
budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which is ironic because these two 
new incentives, which are The Saskatchewan Technology 
Start-up Incentive Act, for the member for Elphinstone, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And I think that the fact that there are new 
ideas coming forward, but they’re agreeing with them. 
 
I think last 75-minute debate we had a talk about pipelines, 
right? We had to talk about pipelines in this Chamber and they 
agreed. This week we’re having a discussion about two 
different new tax initiatives, with tech start-up and AgriInvest 
initiatives, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think they’re going to 
agree with these two initiatives, which begs the question to all 
of us on this side: why did they vote against the budget a couple 
of weeks ago? 
 
All these were in the budget: pro-pipeline initiatives and 
initiatives on start-ups for technology and for AgriInvest. So 
why did they vote against our budget and the new initiatives 
brought forward to better the lives of people in Saskatchewan? 
 
I think that’s what it comes down to. When it comes down to it, 
we keep on bringing forward investment ideas for the people of 
the province. We want to make the world know that 
Saskatchewan is one of the best jurisdictions in the Dominion 
of Canada to invest their hard-earned money, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And that’s what these two new initiatives are for, to 
ensure people realize that Saskatchewan is the place to come 
and to invest money, create jobs so that people can have a great 
quality of life for their family and their children. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one thing we know about the side 
opposite — that will not create investment in this province, will 
not create jobs in this province — is the one policy they’re sure 
about, and that’s they are in favour of a carbon tax. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that is the one policy that this side of the 
House will never put up with. We’ll stand with Saskatchewan 
people. We’ll ensure carbon tax is not foisted upon us by the 
Trudeau Liberals so that we can make sure that Saskatchewan 
continues to be the place to invest. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
happy to be able to rise in the debate today because I’ve been 
thinking about some of the comments that have been made and 
thinking about what a great province we live in and the amazing 
people that live here and come up with innovative ideas. 
 
And this has been going on in Saskatchewan for a long time. 
Obviously when the First Nations occupied the lands, there was 
all kinds of innovations that they would make. And then when 
our European ancestors started arriving here and introducing an 
agrarian life, then the innovations began in terms of agriculture 
and livestock innovation. So if you just think about over the last 
even 100 years, Mr. Speaker, the technological innovations that 
our forefathers and foremothers have come up with, definitely 
we see that continuing on in Saskatchewan here today. 
 
And one of the things that struck me as we were discussing this 



4200 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2018 

topic of technology start-ups is comments that I heard about big 
data for agriculture, Mr. Speaker, and the innovations that are 
occurring right now and the amazing technological changes that 
current agriculture producers are part of the renaissance here of 
what’s happening. 
 
And I was at a Saskatoon Regional Economic Development 
Authority session just before we started session here, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And there was a speaker there from Farm 
Credit Corporation, and he is well known here in Regina, Marty 
Seymour. He used to be involved with the Agribition 
organization. 
 
He gave a really great talk, Mr. Speaker, about some of the very 
exciting technological changes that are coming for agriculture, 
and in particular applications of things like glyphosate for weed 
control. And some of those technologies, Mr. Speaker, involve 
applicators that can actually isolate a particular weed and apply 
the glyphosate specifically to that weed, therefore reducing the 
amount of glyphosate that is needed, which helps the producer’s 
bottom line. And it also helps prevent as many types of these 
chemicals being, you know, passed on through the watershed 
into the water system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So those kinds of brilliant innovations and the technological 
changes that we’ve seen in agriculture in the last few years just 
makes me reflect that this is not new in Saskatchewan. In fact 
that kind of brilliant innovation has been going on from day 
one. And I think about my own brother as a farmer and the 
things that he was able to innovate on his own machinery just to 
make it work a little bit different so that it’d be more efficient. 
 
I can think about my niece’s brother-in-law who works for a 
manufacturing company. It may be Bourgault. It’s one of the 
ones out in the Humboldt area. And he is an inventor, Mr. 
Speaker. He’s hardly 30 years old and he has I think several 
patents with his name on it for innovation in the technology of 
farm machinery, Mr. Speaker, agricultural machinery. 
 
You think about the genome work that’s going on at the 
university right now and just the different sort of ways that 
we’re able to map the human genome and animal genomes. And 
we look at the work at VIDO [Vaccine and Infectious Disease 
Organization] when it comes to viruses like the porcine flu and 
things like that and that kind of brilliance that I think really 
reflects our province and our people and the things that people 
here can do. 
 
So both of these targeted incentives deal with things that are 
very, very important to our province. And I know my colleague 
from Elphinstone said it’s like a tool, Mr. Speaker. We can use 
tools for good; we can use them for bad. I think one of things 
that I’m a little concerned about is the government’s approach 
to these incentives and what sort of work goes into planning 
which is the best incentives to provide, whether or not it’s 
refundable or non-refundable kind of tax incentive. And we’ve 
seen the disaster that occurred when they got rid of the film 
employment tax credit because it was a refundable tax credit. 
And in fact we have the premier speaking about that and talking 
about winning and losing. And he seemed to have a real 
problem with this type of incentive for a particular industry. 
 
Now I want to just refer to one of his comments that he made 

on December 31st, 2013. This was Premier Brad Wall who’s in 
a year-end Q & A [question and answer] with CTV [Canadian 
Television Network Ltd.] Regina. And he was asked about, well 
they were talking about potash and different sectors in the 
province, the potash sector, the manufacturing sector. And he 
said, “So in terms of other sectors, what are your plans to 
leverage that?” And this is what Brad Wall said as a quote, Mr. 
Speaker. He said: 
 

I think we have to stick with the fundamentals. We’ve said, 
as a government, that we’re not going to try and pick 
winners and losers. In the past, governments of all stripes 
have used taxpayers’ dollars to provide grants to 
companies, and we’ve found that that just doesn’t work. 
When we took office, we said we would stop that and 
focus on the basics. The basics, for us, are competitive 
taxes. The basics for us is a labour legislative environment 
that’s also competitive with other jurisdictions. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, that was the premier. I’d like to know, maybe 
has there been a change in this Premier’s views in terms of what 
his predecessor said? Because he said, Brad Wall said, the 
basics are competitive taxes. Now when you create tax 
incentives, that is picking winners and losers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as you know, my colleague referred to a special tax 
incentive that was created a couple years ago. I’ll just refer to it 
properly, Mr. Speaker. And this was an incentive that was 
meant to encourage steel production. Mr. Speaker, we know 
that that was a targeted incentive for a particular corporation. 
The same goes . . . Oh yes, it was the corporation income tax 
rebate for capital investment in primary steel production. And 
to date, that incentive hasn’t been made use of, Mr. Speaker. 
But we know there’s been a downturn in the economy so 
perhaps it will be used eventually. But at this point in time it’s 
not even being used. 
 
There was another one introduced last year on the oil 
processing investment incentive, and we know that this was 
specifically targeted for some form of a refinery in Stoughton, 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, that tax incentive hasn’t been 
made use of yet either. So it’s just kind of interesting how these 
things are chosen, you know, picking winners and losers. 
 
The other thing I did ask the previous Finance minister, how it 
was that these decisions were made, Mr. Speaker. And he didn’t 
have a . . . I want to find that quote as well, Mr. Speaker. We 
were talking about the . . . They introduced a new refundable 
R & D [research and development] tax credit. Now remember 
the premier was not a big fan of refundable tax credits. But I 
said, so why are you bringing this back? It used to be 
non-refundable, and they brought it in as a refundable tax 
credit. And he said . . . This was the patent box incentive tax 
credit as well. We were talking about that in the finance 
committee. And anyways he went on to say: “. . . a refundable 
tax credit is a direct expense for the Ministry of Finance. A 
non-refundable tax credit is a loss of revenue for the province of 
Saskatchewan.” 
 
So I said, where are you getting ideas from, Mr. Speaker, and 
what kind of businesses are you losing if you don’t have this 
credit? And he gave me a list of several anecdotal examples, 
Mr. Speaker. And I was a little concerned that that was the 



May 3, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4201 

approach of the government. And it happened in a conversation, 
a happenstance conversation and that’s when these tax 
incentives are brought in. So I’m not sure that there’s been any 
kind of specific analysis. He talks about the premier and one tax 
incentive, and this is the patent box one. He says: 
 

He met a couple of doctors from New York on some type 
of trip who told him to come down to this particular 
facility in New York because that’s exactly the kind of 
thing they were looking for, and they had incentives in the 
state of New York to provide them with the necessary cash 
flow to develop it. 

 
He goes on further to say, “I came across an accountant in 
Saskatoon when I was up there [who does a lot of books].” So 
he said, “I admit to you it’s anecdotal based on the feedback 
I’ve received and the Premier’s received and the Minister of the 
Economy, for that matter, has received.” 
 
So I worry about the analysis that goes into these, Mr. Speaker. 
But I certainly applaud the smart and bright and innovative 
people of Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
business climate is crucial in attracting investment and inspiring 
entrepreneurs in this province. Both of these tax credits will 
help with our competiveness in the province. You know what 
would kill, what will destroy our competiveness? A carbon tax. 
And I do remind the members opposite that in addition to 
supporting a carbon tax, their leader’s $2.5 billion per year 
spending plan somehow includes no new initiative to increase 
competitiveness. 
 
My question is to the member from Saskatoon Nutana. What is 
your plan to keep Saskatchewan’s business climate effective 
after you try to implement your job-killing carbon tax? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’d 
like to thank the member opposite for his question. I think what 
we really should be talking about here is the technology and 
agricultural industries, and making sure that they are properly 
supported here in Saskatchewan in order to do what they do 
best and that we continue to grow our tech start-ups. And you 
know, I have a friend who was one of the co-founders of 
Vendasta and I have another friend who was a tree planter who 
is on the board of Co.Labs, and I think Wes Jickling should 
certainly be commended for the work he’s done in this area. 
 
So there’s some good people in there, Mr. Speaker, and I think 
if the question related to the actual motion it might be easy to 
answer, but we need to be talking about these tech start-ups and 
we need to be talking about value-added agriculture. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Just to ask the member from Saskatoon University whether or 
not he agrees that a targeted incentive that generated $44 
million of annual economic activity in return for $1 million 
through a tax credit, whether or not that’s a good idea. And to, 
you know, make the example a little more plain, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s based on the analysis conducted by the Saskatchewan 
Chamber of Commerce around the film industry and the film 
employment tax credit. So does he think that’s a good idea, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
[12:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And we have lots of 
good ideas that come out of this place and a lot of good ideas 
that come from this side of the House, not so much from the 
other side there. But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our 
government is focusing on taxpayer priorities like health care, 
social services, and education. And since 2007, 51 per cent 
increase in health care investments or forty-six and a half 
billion dollars invested. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this incentive that we’re putting in place 
specifically for technology companies will help those 
companies access capital that’s waiting for it but we haven’t 
been able to access. That’s private capital. That’s not capital 
from the government or taxpayers’ dollars. We need to spend 
our taxpayers’ dollars where they’re needed most. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know that the 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce has indicated that if we 
want to see tax incentives they really should be directed in the 
area of indigenous entrepreneurship, Mr. Speaker, because 
those are areas that need some attention. So does the member 
for Saskatoon University agree with the chamber of commerce 
that perhaps we should be developing incentives that help 
support indigenous entrepreneurship? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I agree. I agree 
that we should be incentivizing Aboriginal entrepreneurs. We 
should be incentivizing all entrepreneurs in the technology 
field, and that’s exactly what this incentive does, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I was at the Aboriginal Youth Idea Challenge last year, and I 
saw Aboriginal entrepreneurs — at Dakota Dunes is where we 
were — I saw entrepreneurs that come from Aboriginal 
communities. One of them, in fact one of the winners, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I brought down here; she came down here. She 
had a great idea, a technology company. We talked to the 
deputy minister of Health, we talked to officials, and I’m sure 
that they took a look at that and said, hey, this is a great idea. 
 
That is important. That is part of this program and part of this 



4202 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2018 

initiative, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Aboriginal, non-Aboriginal, 
they’ll all benefit from this program to access private capital. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you. As seen federally, massive 
increases to spending and huge new taxes hurt our country’s 
competitiveness in regards to investment. The Trudeau 
government’s plan is similar to the members opposite, from the 
carbon tax and spending increases to the lack of support for 
these value-added incentives. The government has worked hard 
to make our province have some of the most competitive tax 
breaks in Canada, and those credits will only strengthen this. 
 
My question is to the member from Regina Lakeview. Seeing 
the negative impact the federal government’s plan has had on 
our country’s competitiveness, will members opposite drop 
their reckless economic agenda that will be just as damaging? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I thank the 
member opposite for the question. Well speaking of relevant 
debate and reckless economic agenda, I’m looking at an article 
from April of this year, talking about again, Steve McLellan, 
CEO of the chamber of commerce. From a real impact on 
businesses, the changes to the PST on restaurant meals and 
construction labours are the real challenges that our 
communities are facing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the members opposite to take a 
look in the mirror with regard to their reckless agenda and their 
billion-dollar tax on the people of Saskatchewan before they 
start casting stones on this side of the House. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we remember the days when Bill 
Hutchinson and Kevin Doherty and Brad Wall were all saying 
that the film employment tax credit was a bad idea because it 
was a refundable tax credit. And so, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
wondering about why this government, who didn’t like those 
kinds of refundable tax credits before, has now just found 
religion and is now reintroducing them, when they’ve actually 
destroyed an entire industry in Saskatchewan as a result of that 
backwards kind of approach. 
 
So I’m wondering if the member from Saskatoon University 
knows exactly how many jobs were lost in Saskatchewan as a 
result of the cancellation of the film employment tax credit. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And the short 
answer to that is no, I don’t know how many jobs were lost 
because of the changes that were made. What I do know, what I 
do know is that our government is focusing taxpayer priorities 
like health care, social services, and education. 
 

The NDP lost taxpayers’ money on film production companies 
at a time when health care workers were picketing out front of 
this very legislature, because the NDP had no money for health 
care workers and closed 52 hospitals. That’s what I do know, 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan is home 
to approximately 35,000 farms, and in 2015 these agriculture 
producers generated $14 billion in gross farm sales, 
representing 20 per cent of Saskatchewan’s GDP. It is evident 
that the agriculture industry in this province is in high demand, 
and we have the local talent and drive to continue to provide 
our high-quality product to the world while continuing to 
support our local economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the member from Regina Lakeview: do you 
stand with the Saskatchewan ag industry and support our 
government’s value-added ag incentive? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I thank the 
member opposite for the question, if that actually is the 
question. Do I support value-added ag and do I support our 
farmers? The answer is yes. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again to 
the member from Saskatoon University, because he wants to get 
off into these false equivalencies and avoid answering the 
question, in terms of the film employment tax credit, something 
that generated $44 million of economic activity for $1 million 
on a tax credit, Mr. Speaker, what has he got against the people 
in the film industry? What has he got against the people that 
made a living for that, and that have now had to relocate to 
other provinces? Not unlike, I guess, their premier, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I guess the question is, why wouldn’t they take up a 
measure that’s generated economic activity, created jobs, and 
diversified our economy? Why is that so wrong? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
thank you for the question once again. I’ll go back to the facts 
right now. Our government is focused on taxpayer priorities 
like health care, social services, and education. The NDP lost 
money on the film production companies at a time when health 
workers were picketing out front of this legislature because 
the . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 
expired. 
 
 



May 3, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4203 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READING 
 

Bill No. 606 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 606 — The Election 
(Fairness and Accountability) Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
enter into debate here this afternoon as it relates to Bill No. 606, 
the Act that would get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. 
And you know, it’s interesting. I’ve entered back into this 
debate here today with Bill 606. I had brought forward before, 
along with our team, Bill No. 602 in a previous sitting of this 
legislature, this same bill to get big money out of Saskatchewan 
politics. 
 
Sadly that bill wasn’t passed. We brought it forward. We 
pushed it. We called on the premier to support it. Of course that 
was a premier who had filled his pockets with a top-up, Mr. 
Speaker, with, certainly in part, big money from donors far 
outside Saskatchewan, big corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this is an important bill. It gets to a matter of trust for a 
government. It addresses questions of influence for a 
government. And it’s about putting democracy back in the 
hands of Saskatchewan people, and from our perspective they 
deserve nothing less. 
 
We have a bill that we’ve brought forward here today. As I say, 
we brought it forward in the past. We have it here again. This is 
an important measure to build trust with Saskatchewan people 
and to revive our democracy here in our province. And you 
know, I appeal to members opposite to support it. 
 
It’s a common-sense measure, measures in this bill, Mr. 
Speaker. It eliminates out-of-province donations, Mr. Speaker. 
It eliminates corporate and union donations, Mr. Speaker, and it 
caps the individual donations, ensuring fairness for all people in 
the province, ensuring that one’s wealth doesn’t allow greater 
potential influence in the democratic process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re the wild west, if you will, of electoral finance laws 
across Canada, Mr. Speaker. Every other jurisdiction has 
stepped up and provided their residents, their citizens measures 
that have brought democracy back. To Saskatchewan people, 
but here we’re still . . . We’ve got the wild west under the Sask 
Party, and of course it’s been to their benefit to leave it that 
way, Mr. Speaker. They’ve had no trouble filling their pockets 
with millions of dollars of out-of-province corporations and 
big-money interests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They had no trouble in fact to fill the pockets of the premier that 
just departed, Mr. Speaker, with a top-up, with a top-up, Mr. 
Speaker, if you can imagine, on top of the pay, the very good 

pay that the premier received as being the premier of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And the questions across . . . I’m getting members heckling 
across, their typical level of engagement in these affairs, asking 
questions they should know the answer to. Their question is, did 
former NDP premiers receive top-ups? And the answer to that 
is absolutely not, Mr. Speaker. From Lorne Calvert all the way 
back through Douglas, Mr. Speaker, top-ups weren’t something 
that those members accepted. 
 
But what we know about the former premier who just recently 
left of course to Calgary, Mr. Speaker, the recent premier who 
left after he brought forward that devastating budget that was a 
threat to our Crown corporations, that foisted massive taxes on 
to Saskatchewan people, we know that that premier received 
close to half a million dollars in top-ups, Mr. Speaker. Half a 
million dollars in top-ups from money coming from, in part, big 
money, Mr. Speaker, in part from those donations, those dollars 
from corporations far outside Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this gets to a question of trust and what’s guiding our 
choices. And what we realized with this self-interested Sask 
Party, Mr. Speaker, is that they’ve broken trust with 
Saskatchewan people. And you have to start to wonder what’s 
motivated the decisions of this government, the government that 
had said to Saskatchewan people that they wouldn’t sell off 
their Crown corporations, in an election. Actually they said it 
election after election after election. They said it just a couple of 
years ago in that last election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But of course that wasn’t the case, because right after that 
election, Mr. Speaker, they went at our Crown corporations. 
Went after them with a sell-off attempt, put them at risk. They 
sold off the STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company], the 
public transportation company, Mr. Speaker. They put a bill on 
the table, if you can imagine, right after they had promised 
Saskatchewan people that our Crowns were safe from 
privatization, that would have allowed the potential sell-off of 
up to 49 per cent of all of our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when you look at the dollars that are flowing into this 
government, when you look at the dollars that are flowing into, 
by way of a top-up, into a Premier who is paid very well 
publicly to serve the people of the province, people have 
rightful questions about who are they serving, Mr. Speaker. 
And it’s a matter of trust. 
 
And now we see it with this, you know, we’ve got this broken, 
tired operation we see opposite at this stage of the game, Mr. 
Speaker, and, you know, certainly broke by way of dollars, Mr. 
Speaker, tripled the debt in their period of time, a period of time 
where they presided over unprecedented revenues that 
should’ve been a blessing, not for the government but for the 
people of the province. This is a government that failed to 
capture and seize a historic opportunity that presented to the 
people of the province, and now of course they’re there looking 
through the couch cushions for dollars, Mr. Speaker, looking at 
any spot that they can find some dollars, throwing taxes onto 
the private sale of used cars, if you can imagine, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[12:15] 
 



4204 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2018 

And now they’re looking to try to sell off the people’s assets, 
Mr. Speaker, the people’s assets. You know, the one that stands 
out to me — and I just heard the debate here just a few minutes 
ago in this Assembly — but this is a Sask Party that actually 
shuttered the film industry, that made the deliberate choice to 
drive away investment from this province, to drive away jobs. 
And now they’re looking, if you can imagine, to sell off the 
sound stage, Mr. Speaker. Who are they looking to sell that off 
to? This is the people’s assets, Mr. Speaker, and today the 
sound stage, tomorrow SaskTel. Who knows what’s next with 
this government, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And who knows what’s motivating them? Because we have the 
wild west of election finance laws in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. We have a Sask Party government that has filled its 
coffers, and of course a member in the case of the former 
premier who had filled his pockets with those dollars, Mr. 
Speaker. And it is a serious matter of trust for the people . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I would caution the member in his 
remarks not to reflect on or impugn the honour of members of 
this Assembly. I recognize the member from Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And of course 
what we have is a trust that’s been broken with the people of the 
province. 
 
You know, and at one point this is a party that had gone out in 
earnest and had done some hard work. And they reached out 
and they earned the trust of very good people all across this 
province in many corners, and you see that. You see that with a 
large majority with many seats over there, Mr. Speaker. But of 
course they weren’t straight with Saskatchewan people when 
they went about that work, Mr. Speaker. And when we see the 
dollars that flow into this government’s party, so many 
questions that are raised as to who they’re serving. 
 
At the end of the day, a government in this province, a premier 
in this province is there to serve the public’s interest. They’re 
there to serve the people of this province and there should be no 
question, Mr. Speaker, as to any other motivations. 
 
And we’ve seen a government as well that’s been scandal 
plagued. You know, we think of that former minister that was 
flagged with scandal after scandal after scandal, Bill Boyd, Mr. 
Speaker. We think of that deal out there at the GTH that in fact 
enriched, in a major way, donors of that Sask Party, Mr. 
Speaker. Actions of government that ripped off nuns, that 
ripped off taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, but filled the pockets of 
donors of that party. And in that case, actually the minister, Mr. 
Speaker, that minister was in fact in a business relationship with 
one of those parties that made out with I think $6 million in this 
case. 
 
And of course it wasn’t long ago that there were some members 
on that side that were sort of intimating that maybe the time is 
now for a little bit of transparency on this front. I heard it 
actually from the Deputy Premier. I thought he had a really 
solid message on this front, that there should be a full inquiry 
into the GTH to get to the bottom of it. 
 
And I don’t always agree with the member from Meadow Lake. 
I get along with him when we’re talking hunting and fishing. 

We sometimes depart in opinions on matters before this House. 
But I sure thought he was bang on when he called out the GTH 
as something that needed a full spotlight on it. And that was a 
former minister of the GTH who was actually up in this 
Assembly day after day after day, trying to defend the actions 
of Bill Boyd, the former premier, that cabinet in this deal, Mr. 
Speaker. And at the end of the day, if they have nothing to hide 
on matters like this, let’s put a spotlight on what’s gone on. 
Let’s shed some daylight on these dealings. 
 
So we brought forward a bill here today that would bring 
democracy back to Saskatchewan people, that would rebuild 
trust for Saskatchewan people, that would work to end 
out-of-province donations, Mr. Speaker, out-of-province 
donations. Why should people outside Saskatchewan be having 
a say in Saskatchewan politics, Mr. Speaker? It should be for 
Saskatchewan people. And it would also end donations from 
unions and corporations, erasing questions of influence on 
either front, Mr. Speaker. This bill is something that’s popular 
with the people of the province, that’s common sense, and 
builds trust for the people of the province. 
 
And you have to wonder why this government relents in their 
head-in-the-sand approach on this front. You have to wonder 
why the new Premier wouldn’t take the opportunity to do 
something the past premier wouldn’t, and that would be to get 
big money out of Saskatchewan politics and build trust, Mr. 
Speaker, as well making sure that we put a cap on individual 
donations across our province, making sure that those that have, 
you know, significant wealth can’t exercise significantly more 
participation in the democratic process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we have a bill that’s before this government. We have a 
choice for this government opposite to, I guess, decide how to 
proceed here. It’s disappointing, disappointing that we’re here 
again this year when we’ve been here years previous with a bill 
before. It was 602 before. Now the bill is 606. The content is 
the same. The premise is the same. It’s that people deserve to 
have trust in their democratic process and that we need to get 
big money out of the democratic process. 
 
You know, we’ve been out all across the province on this front. 
This is something that people appreciate in every corner of this 
province. And I’d implore members opposite, I’d implore the 
new Premier to apply some fresh eyes to this file. This is an 
important measure for the people of the province. It’s 
problematic that we are out of line with the rest of Canada. It’s 
problematic that Saskatchewan people are losing faith in their 
democratic process because of things like the question of big 
money and the question of influence and the question of who a 
government is serving, if they’re filling their pockets from large 
big-moneyed interests over here, but then supposed to serve the 
people of the province over there. 
 
And I think ultimately we have the resources in this province. 
We have incredible people in every corner. We have 
world-class businesses throughout this province. There’s simply 
just no need to have money flowing in and filling the coffers of 
a governing party — or any party for that matter — from far 
outside Saskatchewan. And I think that if those members took 
the kind of heckling and noise they’re making here today, and 
their unwillingness to bring forward a very basic reform like 
this to their constituents, I think they’d find that they’re on the 



May 3, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4205 

wrong side of this issue in a very, very serious way. 
 
And the member from Wascana Plains, you know, shouts out 
no. And I would urge that member to ask that question to her 
constituents, maybe not just those that donate to her. What I 
would ask that member to do is to ask her constituents, the 
rank-and-file people in her constituency that are working day 
after day to build and better this province, the rank-and-file 
entrepreneurs throughout her constituency, Mr. Speaker, the 
teachers throughout her constituency, those that work for the 
Crown corporations that are being put at risk by her 
government, Mr. Speaker. Those are the people that I would be 
asking, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think that, you know, these . . . too often, members opposite 
have been caught up in a bit of an echo chamber, Mr. Speaker, 
with their donors and pals, Mr. Speaker, and that they’ve lost 
touch with the people of the province, that they’ve lost touch 
with the reality that so many people face, and I believe that if 
they reached out in a sincere way on this front, they would hear 
that this is important. 
 
And we hear the member from Moose Jaw, you know, 
Wakamow. We don’t hear him say . . . You know, when do we 
hear the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow or any member 
from Moose Jaw speak in this Assembly anymore, Mr. Speaker, 
other than heckle? The answer would be not much. And the 
member from Moose Jaw Wakamow chooses to heckle me and 
my speech. That’s fine here today, but what I wish the member 
for Moose Jaw would do is bring his voice forward for the 
people of Moose Jaw day after day in this Assembly to build a 
brighter future. And I suspect the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow would find that he’s highly offside with the 
hard-working people that he serves when he tries to defend to 
them that somehow his party needs to be able to fill its pockets, 
its coffers, Mr. Speaker, with large out-of-province money, 
big-money interests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know the people of Moose Jaw Wakamow are good folks, 
hard-working people who deserve to have full faith in our 
democratic process. And I bet you they’d find it pretty strange 
and offensive that the very rare entry into debate by the member 
from Moose Jaw Wakamow would be to push back from a 
measure that would provide a level of democracy and 
improving our democracy and our province. 
 
You know . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . and I watch the 
member, he’s heckling, so . . . He doesn’t listen though, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s probably the issue as well in that caucus in 
general. It’s probably why he fails to serve his constituents, Mr. 
Speaker. He was mentioning unions, and so let me slow it down 
and explain one more time here, Mr. Speaker. The bill that’s 
brought forward here would eliminate — would eliminate — 
corporate and union donations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The bill that’s brought forward would end out-of-province 
corporations, Mr. Speaker, and it would put a cap on individual 
donations in the province. And you know it surprises me in this 
day at times what members opposite, you know, what positions 
they’ll take. And it’s strange on this one because I think that 
this is something that we can do for everyone in our province. 
 
And I believe we should be taking every measure, every last 

one of us regardless of the party that we serve, to improve the 
trust in the democratic process, a trust that has been eroded, Mr. 
Speaker, and questions that are serious of this governing party 
and who . . . questions of who they’re serving, Mr. Speaker, and 
what motivates the choices that they’re making, the choices that 
are hurting people today, the choices that are limiting the future 
of our province, the choices that clearly aren’t in the economic 
interests of our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we’ll continue to stand and to fight to get big money out of 
Saskatchewan politics, as the official opposition, as the 
Saskatchewan New Democrats. I know that there’s tons of 
people across political lines that support other parties as well, 
Mr. Speaker, who support this position. And I know that 
Saskatchewan people will be very disappointed by the lack of 
support by the Sask Party on this front. And it only further 
causes Saskatchewan people, who have really lost trust in this 
tired, worn-out government, mismanaged government, Mr. 
Speaker, it only erodes that trust even further. 
 
With all that being said, Mr. Speaker, we brought forward, I 
brought forward Bill 602 along with our team a year and some 
ago. That government failed to do the right thing at that point in 
time. That was at a time though where we had a premier in 
place, who of course, was receiving additional dollars — a 
top-up, if you can imagine — on top of his pay to serve the 
people of the province with party money that would float in, of 
course, in part, from big-moneyed interests outside 
Saskatchewan. So maybe that was the holdup for the then 
premier and the cabinet, the fact that he had received so many 
thousands of dollars on that front. We have a new Premier, and 
there’s a new cabinet, and there’s backbenchers over there that, 
I think, know that this is the right thing to do. 
 
So I would urge members opposite to apply some fresh eyes to 
this, to do the right thing, to pass this bill, and get big money 
out of Saskatchewan politics, and put democracy back in the 
hands of Saskatchewan people. 
 
At this point in time as it relates to Bill No. 606, I’ll adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 606. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that the House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:28.]



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4183 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4183 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4183 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4183 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4197 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4197 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4183 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4184 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4184 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4184 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Milestone Youth Is an Ambassador, Fundraiser, and Inventor 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4184 
 International Day of the Midwife 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4185 
 School Safety Patrol Week 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4185 
 Jane’s Walks 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4185 
 Gatsby Night for Autism Held in Saskatoon 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4185 
 Melville Helps Humboldt by Hosting Archery Tournament 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4186 
 Wages, Personal Income Tax, and Affordability 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4186 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Pilot Training Program 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4186 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4186 
 Support for Indigenous Education 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4187 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4187 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4187 
 Global Transportation Hub and Government Transparency 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4187 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4187 
 Rental Housing Supplement 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4188 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4188 
 Value and Taxation of Used Vehicles 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4189 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4189 
 Minister’s Comments and Provincial Budget 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4190 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4190 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4190 
 Domestic Violence Legislation 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4190 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4190 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4191 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Government’s Commitment to Innovation  
  Olauson .......................................................................................................................................................................... 4191, 4201 
  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4193, 4201 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4195 
  Beck ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4196, 4202 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4198 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4199, 4201 



 

  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4201 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4202 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4202 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READING 
 Bill No. 606 — The Election (Fairness and Accountability) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4203 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


