


















































May 1, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 51A  TUESDAY, MAY 1, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4119 
 May 1, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has asked leave for an extended 
introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With us today we have 
Advocis, The Financial Advisors Association of Canada group. 
With more than 13,000 members across the country and 500 
right here in Saskatchewan, Advocis is the definitive voice for 
the profession, advocating for professionalism and consumer 
protection. Professional financial planners and planners are 
critical to the economy, helping consumers make sound 
financial decisions that ultimately lead to greater financial 
stability and independence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Advocis works with decision makers and the 
public, stressing the value of financial advice and striving for an 
environment in which all Canadians have access to advice they 
need. Their members are in every community across 
Saskatchewan and participate in charities and community-based 
initiatives. 
 
Advocis has a long-standing tradition of working co-operatively 
with government and regulatory bodies to ensure the consumers 
of financial services are adequately protected, have ample 
choice and access to professional financial advice, and that the 
financial advisory industry continues to be an important part of 
Saskatchewan’s economy. I had the opportunity to sit with them 
this morning and saw first hand the true advocacy that they 
bring to their profession. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with us today we have Peter Tzanetakis, Greg 
Pollock, Jim Virtue, Abe Toews, Brian Mallard, John Dean, 
Edward Ortiz, Curtis Kimpton, Jeff Rask, Kris Birchard, Walter 
Klassen, Lyn McGaughey, Tammy Richmond, Bill Odishaw, 
Christine Iles, Terry Brownell, Becky Brenner, Brian Golly, 
Neil Smith, Jake Ripplinger, Ken Ripplinger, Gil Ennis, Brian 
Leipert, and Chris Hengen-Braun. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members welcome this group to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Requesting 
leave for an extended introduction. 
 

The Speaker: — The member for Rosemont has requested 
leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s an honour to join with the member opposite to 
welcome Advocis here today, a national organization 
representing financial advisors and the financial industry, the 
personal financial industry. Very strong representation within 
our province as well, and certainly we valued the time to sit 
down here today and to talk about the financial advising 
industry and how we work to make sure that we have the most 
robust environment around accountability, transparency, and 
integrity to that system. These are all things that Advocis 
champions. 
 
So I thank them for their voice. I thank their 500 members 
across Saskatchewan that play a very important role within the 
Saskatchewan economy, that also play of course a very 
important role with Saskatchewan people. I’m thankful for their 
voice around measures that would support greater consumer 
protection. 
 
I’ve also been very thankful for their voice and so many of their 
members against the imposition of the PST [provincial sales 
tax] on insurance in last year’s budget. And I believe the 
changes that have been recently brought forward are certainly 
reflective of the voice of so many of these within the industry. 
And their voice around matters around financial literacy in 
education are also valued. 
 
So I ask all members to join with me in welcoming Advocis, all 
those representing the financial industry within our province 
and across Canada. 
 
And while still on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 
introduce a friend seated in your gallery, Jason Hicks from 
Saskatoon. He’s a proud pipefitter. He’s been down here 
working on the refinery shutdown. He’s a member with UA 
[United Association of plumbers and pipefitters] 179, a real 
good guy, Mr. Speaker. He’s heading back to his family here 
today. He has a strong history of standing up for workers within 
our province. He was once a minister’s assistant in this very 
building. And he’s got a wonderful family that he raises along 
with his wonderful partner, Ashlee. So it’s my pleasure to 
welcome Jason Hicks to his Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, it’s indeed my 
pleasure to once again introduce a great grade 10 class from the 
Yorkton Regional High School led by Mr. Perry Ostapowich 
and Mr. Jason Payne in the west gallery, 37 grade 10 students, 
Mr. Speaker, that are here. With them also is their bus driver, 
Pat Rawlick, whose name is scratched off my list again because 
he stays out in the bus, but we’re going to get him in here one 
of these days. 
 



4120 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2018 

As is customary with this class, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Ostapowich 
encourages them to contact their MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] to get them used to interacting. So those 
that contacted me this time are Jaden Collins; Bryanna Jack; 
Maggie Robertson, who’s father is also Quintin Robertson, the 
director of education for Good Spirit School Division; Johntee 
Ostapowich, who is Perry Ostapowich’s son. I told him some 
nice things about his dad, which is very fitting. Also with them 
is Ka Wayne in the group there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also something that Mr. Ostapowich pointed out is, with this 
group, is over 1,000 students that he’s escorted to this 
Assembly — well-educated group, people always very 
informed on what happens in this place. So, Mr. Speaker, I ask 
all members to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to also introduce a good friend of mine that has 
been introduced already today, but Curtis Kimpton has joined 
us with Advocis. He’s a good friend of mine. We met during 
my stint with Kinsmen Club of Saskatoon as a member. And 
actually, by the way, the people watching at home right now, 
the Kinsmen Home Lottery is going on and you can go online 
right now and purchase their ticket. 
 
And if Curtis would give a wave, or members give a wave at 
Curtis. Everyone that has waved today, I’ll be hitting up to buy 
a Kinsmen Home Lottery ticket after question period. So with 
you, please everyone welcome Curtis Kimpton to his Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
acknowledge two members of the Advocis group: Brian 
Leipert, who is a constituent of Regina Rochdale, so thank you 
very much for coming and having the opportunity to meet with 
the government to talk about the importance of education in 
Advocis. 
 
But I also want to acknowledge Chris Hengen. I didn’t 
recognize Chris. Chris came to see me this morning, and the last 
time I saw Chris I think he was 6 years old. And so he said, I 
don’t know if you’ll remember me, and I went, no, because he’s 
a fine strapping young man today. But I worked closely with 
Chris’s mom and dad, Tom and Shelley Hengen. So it was a 
real treat to kind of catch up with Chris and to touch base and 
find out how his mom and dad are doing, and again to have a 
very fruitful discussion in regards to the importance of 
education with the Advocis group. So thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
to present a petition to the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan to provide trapping licence exemptions for 
residents 65 years or older. That trappers are a very important 
group of people that maintain traditional values in 

Saskatchewan. The fur harvesting industry provides many 
economic benefits to the province. The province has 
exemptions for fishing licences for residents over 65 years or 
older, but there are no age exemptions for trappers yet. 
 
And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to immediately show their 
support for Saskatchewan trappers and provide a trapping 
licence exemption for Saskatchewan residents over the age 
of 65. 
 

It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed 
to the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Carrot 
River. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present 
a petition to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. And 
the undersigned residents of this province want to bring to your 
attention the following: that Saskatchewan’s outdated election 
Act allows corporations, unions, and individuals, even those 
living outside the province, to make unlimited donations to our 
province’s political parties. And we know that the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve to live in a fair province where all voices 
are equal and money cannot influence politics. 
 
And we know that over the past 10 years the Saskatchewan 
Party has received $12.61 million in corporate donations, and, 
of that, $2.87 million coming from companies outside 
Saskatchewan. You know, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan 
politics should belong to Saskatchewan people. And we know 
that the federal government and the provinces of Alberta, 
Manitoba, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and now British Columbia 
have moved to limit this influence and level the playing field by 
banning corporate and union donations to political parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 



May 1, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4121 

Party to overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign finance laws, 
to end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 
from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 
on individual donations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
Lumsden and Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition calling on the government to stop the cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms. These citizens wish to bring to your attention that 
even though the Sask Party is making us all pay more, our kids 
are actually getting less; and that Sask Party cuts mean that 
students will lose much needed supports in their classroom, 
including funding for buses for kindergarteners, and programs 
to help children with special needs and autism. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, the undersigned, call on the government to reverse the 
senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and stop making 
families, teachers, and everyone who works to support our 
education pay the price for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
This is signed by individuals from Saskatoon and Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical workplace supports for 
survivors of domestic violence. Saskatchewan has the highest 
rate of intimate partner violence amongst all of the provinces, 
and we know that we must do much more to protect survivors 
of domestic violence. 
 
For many who experience domestic violence, that violence will 
follow them to their workplace, which is why the signatories to 
this petition are calling for five days of paid leave and up to 17 
weeks of unpaid leave be made available to workers who are 
survivors of domestic violence, and that critical workplace 
supports made available to survivors of domestic violence be 
also made available to workers living with PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder] as a result of domestic violence, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is what those who are on the front line of this crisis are 
calling for, in particular those who work at the Regina YWCA 
[Young Women’s Christian Association] and PATHS 
[Provincial Association of Transition Houses and Services of 
Saskatchewan], just to name a few organizations. It’s what we 
called for in our private member’s bill, No. 609, which is the 
fourth time we’ve put those provisions forward in this House in 
the last two years. It’s time for the government to step up to the 
plate, do the right thing, and pass that bill. 
 
[13:45] 
 

I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to pass legislation to ensure 
critical supports in the workplace, including reasonable 
accommodation and paid and unpaid leave for survivors of 
domestic violence. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition today come 
from Regina. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

Number of Physicians in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as of 
this week the latest census on physician numbers province-wide 
is in. Today we are proud to announce that we have nearly 900 
more physicians in Saskatchewan than we did in 2007. Mr. 
Speaker, that represents an increase of 51 per cent in just over a 
decade. 
 
In just over a decade since taking office, we’ve increased the 
number of general practitioners by 43 per cent, the number of 
pediatricians by 98 per cent, and the number of psychiatrists by 
37 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we owe the success to the number of recruitment 
and retention initiatives that have been launched over the years, 
including implementing one of the best physician compensation 
rates in the country, increasing the number of medical 
undergrad seats from 60 to 100, doubling the number of 
medical residency positions to 120, establishing more family 
medicine resident training sites across the province, and 
recruitment of more than 200 internationally trained physicians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although there is much more to do, we have made 
tremendous progress in building and sustaining our physician 
workforce in the province. And we will continue to invest in the 
physician recruitment and retention initiatives to ensure 
Saskatchewan residents have high-quality and timely health 
care services. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Final Year for the Regina Police Service Half Marathon 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise today, if but a little slowly, to recognize the 2018 
Regina Police Service Half Marathon which took place this past 
Sunday, April 29th. It was the 15th and final RPS [Regina 
Police Service] half-marathon, and I was happy to participate in 
it along with hundreds of runners and volunteers and 
supporters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the half-marathon started out as an initiative of the 
Regina Police Service wellness program in 2004 to promote 
healthy lifestyles for the members of the police service and the 
community of Regina. And it has been a tremendous success in 



4122 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2018 

doing just that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to recognize the winners of the half-marathon: Iain Fyfe, 
who posted the best men’s time of the day at 1:19:35; and 
Kaytlyn Criddle, who posted the top women’s time and third 
overall with a blistering 1:27:35. These two incredible athletes 
are no strangers to the RPS top spot as both athletes have each 
won this event before. 
 
A special congratulations as well to the four members of the 
RPS SWAT [special weapons and tactics] team that completed 
the 21.1-kilometre run in mostly full SWAT team gear, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Congratulations to all participants, and thanks to the legion of 
volunteers who have made the RPS Half Marathon such a 
success. Thank you to Chief Evan Bray and the Regina Police 
Service on yet another great run. And thank you so very much 
and job very well done to Patti Sandison-Cattell, RPS Half 
Marathon founder and organizer for these 15 years of running 
with Regina’s finest. We are all better off for your work, Patti. 
Thank you so much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Silverspring-Sutherland. 
 

Brain Tumour Awareness Month 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise today in recognition of Brain Tumour Awareness 
Month. Every day 27 more Canadians will be diagnosed with 
some form of brain tumour. The Brain Tumour Foundation of 
Canada estimates that there are 55,000 Canadians that are 
surviving with a brain tumour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, within the first year of being diagnosed, a patient 
on average makes 52 visits to their health care team. Brain 
tumours are complex because they can affect a person’s vision, 
hearing, memory, balance, language skills, and mobility. 
Thankfully brain tumour patients, their loved ones, and 
caregivers can receive the support from the Brain Tumour 
Foundation of Canada. The Brain Tumour Foundation of 
Canada offers funding for researchers, supplies information 
about brain tumours, and offers support by phone, online, and in 
person with local support groups. 
 
Saskatoon is very lucky to have a brain tumour support group 
that meets every month from September to June and is led by 
two wonderful volunteers from the Saskatoon 
Silverspring-Sutherland constituency, Ms. Karen 
Kowalenko-Evjen and Mr. Gary Evjen. I would like to thank 
them for all their time and their support that they give to their 
support group members over the years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in recognizing May 
as Brain Tumour Awareness Month in order to support those 
that are surviving with a brain tumour. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

May Day 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, today is May Day, a very 

important day for workers and workers’ rights everywhere. 
Also known as International Labour Day, May Day traces its 
roots back to the 19th century fight for an eight-hour workday, 
something many of us take for granted in these modern times. 
 
It was on this day in 1886 that thousands of workers from all 
over North America came together to fight for change in 
Chicago’s Haymarket Square. For more than a hundred years, 
workers have marked May Day as a time to remember the 
hard-fought gains that have been made to advance workers’ 
rights and to improve workplace safety. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also a time to reflect on what we all can do to 
make our workplaces safer and what the idea of workers’ rights 
means in the modern era. May Day has always been about 
promotion and protection of rights on an international scale, and 
when we look around the world, we know there is so much 
more that needs to be done. Now more than ever, we should be 
setting the bar for labour standards and standing in solidarity 
with workers around the globe who are being denied their basic 
fundamental labour rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of the House join with 
me in recognizing May Day. I am honoured to stand in 
solidarity with workers throughout the world in calling for fair, 
safe working conditions for everyone. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 

STARS Helipad in Lloydminster 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, great news for Lloydminster is on 
the horizon. Patients in Lloydminster and surrounding area will 
soon benefit from a STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue 
Society] helicopter landing pad at the Lloydminster Hospital. 
Mr. Speaker, the helipad will reduce the number of patient 
handovers, which will be safer for patients as well as lessen the 
challenges for health care teams during patient transfers. 
 
STARS transport, via the helipad, will provide better continuity 
of care. CEO [chief executive officer] of the Saskatchewan 
Health Authority Scott Livingstone said that the helipad will 
provide critical service to the Lloydminster area by allowing 
health care professionals to treat patients more quickly. The 
Lloydminster Hospital is a 66-bed acute care hospital serving a 
referral population of approximately 72,500 people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the helipad project is estimated to cost $350,000 
and Husky Energy has provided significant support to the 
project, offering the required land and financial support as well 
as assisting coordination of the plan from beginning to end. The 
Lloydminster Regional Health Foundation is leading a 
fundraising campaign to pay for the remaining costs of the 
project, which is around 200,000. The Lloydminster Rotary 
Club has also contributed $50,000, and Musgrave Agencies is 
providing in-kind donations as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is truly a community coming together to take 
care of its people. I’d ask that all members join me in thanking 
Lloydminster health region, Husky Energy, the Lloydminster 
Rotary Club, Musgrave Agencies, and everyone else involved 
for their work in making sure this project is a success. Thank 



May 1, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4123 

you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Notre Dame Hounds Win Telus Cup 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
congratulations to the Notre Dame Hounds from Wilcox, who 
this past weekend won the National Midget AAA Hockey Telus 
Cup which was held in Sudbury, Ontario, which happens to be 
home of Letterkenny. 
 
Anyway it’s been eight years since the Hounds have played in 
this tournament. After an impressive regular season and playoff 
season, the Hounds defeated the Quebec representatives in the 
championship game 5-1. Luke Mylymok led the Hounds in the 
final game with a hat trick, having scored two goals in the 
second and an empty-netter to seal the deal. Zach Plucinski and 
Ethan Ernst also added their names to the history books, scoring 
one goal each. Mr. Speaker, although the Hounds were out-shot 
30 to 22, goaltender Aaron Randazzo had an impressive 
performance, allowing only one puck past him. 
 
This was a huge win to cap off a perfect tournament for the 
Hounds, as they went 5 and 0 in the preliminary round. This 
victory marks the fifth national title for the Hounds, making 
them the most successful Midget AAA team ever in Canada. 
And I think there’s somebody in the gallery that had something 
to do with that many, many years ago actually. We’re extremely 
proud of all the success the Hounds have had over the number 
of years. 
 
On behalf of all the members of this Assembly, I want to 
congratulate the amazing group of players, the coaches, and the 
staff of the Hounds from Notre Dame on winning the 2018 
Telus Cup. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 
 

Full Gospel Business Men’s Fellowship Banquet 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tuesday 
last week, along with many other members of this Assembly, I 
had the pleasure of attending the MLA banquet hosted by the 
Saskatchewan chapters of Full Gospel Business Men’s 
Fellowship in Canada. 
 
This year was the 25th anniversary of the MLA banquet in this 
Legislative Building. Every year at this event, the 
Saskatchewan chapters recognize people within Saskatchewan 
for their contributions to their communities and how their faith 
calls them to action. Mr. Speaker, recognized this year was 
Harold Stephan of Lloydminster, recipient of the Queen’s Silver 
Jubilee Medal by the Government of Canada, for his 
contributions to improving the lives of his fellow Canadians 
through business and now his Battle River Ranch Camp. 
 
Harold thoughtfully brought beautiful handmade crosses for all 
government and opposition MLAs to the event. For that we 
truly thank him. The crosses are handcrafted by him from 
horseshoe nails that are wrapped with 16 winds of wire to 
represent the lives of those lost in the Humboldt Broncos 

tragedy. Wires are also crossed at the centre of the cross to 
signify a united province. 
 
Also recognized this year was his son Blaine Stephan, co-owner 
of Guardian Plumbing & Heating. Blaine and his family were 
also recognized by the Lloydminster Chamber of Commerce in 
2017 with the Business of Excellence and Employer of the Year 
Awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, both of these individuals spoke at the event, 
providing attendees some insight into the work they’ve done 
and that they continue to do. By sharing their personal Christian 
testimonies, they shared how their accomplishments are only 
able to be achieved through a relationship with Jesus Christ. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Assembly to join me in congratulating 
Harold and Blaine on their awards, their contributions to their 
communities, and their faith. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Measures to Prevent Domestic Violence 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As part of the Walk a 
Mile awareness-raising event yesterday, a number of members 
of this Assembly were rocking some red pumps to show support 
for survivors of domestic violence and to show our 
determination to address what is that shameful reality, that we 
have the highest rates of domestic violence in the country right 
here in Saskatchewan. And supporters of and survivors of 
domestic violence, supporters of survivors and the survivors are 
looking to us in the Assembly to take action to address those 
circumstances. 
 
And so my question is for the Deputy Premier. What actions 
will this government take to move further to address those 
growing concerns around domestic violence here in the 
province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think this is a 
problem that is shared by all members in the legislature and 
certainly by citizens all the way across the province. It’s 
something we should take seriously. We do have an 
unacceptably high rate of domestic violence in our province. 
Some of the things that we have done is we’ve passed 
legislation to allow for the breaking of a lease. We’ve also 
allowed 10 unpaid days for victims and families to access 
services. We’re doing now consultation on a Saskatchewan 
variant of Clare’s law, a law that was passed in the United 
Kingdom that allows the police to disclose information about 
previous violent or abusive behaviour. 
 
We have created a legal advice line for victims of domestic 
violence, providing for . . . It’s a four-year program and will 
apprise up to two hours of coverage. So we’ve amended the 
legislation in some things. We also have The Victims of 
Interpersonal Violence Act which extends non-contact 
provisions to victims’ schools and workplaces. We’ve added 
harassment and deprivation of necessities as prohibited forms of 



4124 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2018 

interpersonal violence. We’ve also had prohibitions on 
electronic communications between parties. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And one certainly 
hopes — and sees that — the mile that we walked yesterday is 
in many ways a mile of common ground, common ground in 
wanting to decrease the number of people who are living in 
fear, who are unable to leave an abusive situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now four times, our House Leader and Justice critic has risen to 
introduce a bill to really make a real difference in the lives of 
survivors of domestic violence, to introduce 5 days of paid 
leave, 17 weeks of unpaid leave as required, and support for 
those survivors who are experiencing PTSD.  
 
[14:00] 
 
So my question again for the Deputy Premier is, in this session, 
will he and his government stand and support Bill 609, The 
Sask Employment (Support for Survivors of Domestic Violence) 
Amendment Act? We’d really like to see that passed this 
session. The people in this province who are affected by this 
issue cannot wait. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve looked at different 
approaches that were taking place across Canada. We’ve chosen 
to align our province with the protections that are in place in the 
province of Alberta. And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to 
monitor and watch what takes place elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to let the members opposite know that it 
was this government that opened the first new transition house 
in Saskatchewan since 1989. That is in Melfort. In 16 years of 
NDP [New Democratic Party] government, there was not one 
that was opened. 
 
We provide $11.4 million annually for interpersonal violence 
and abuse services. There are three domestic violence 
therapeutic courts, five domestic violence victim services 
programs, six Aboriginal family violence programs, nine 
children exposed to violence programs, police-based victim 
services in 92 police jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have proclaimed Domestic Violence Week. 
It’s the fourth time that we’ve done this. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re going to continue to do those kind of things. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Costs and Benefits of Public-Private Partnerships 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this year the Sask Party 
will be handing over $13.5 million in maintenance and interest 
charges to the consortium that they hired for their costly P3 
[public-private partnership] rent-a-school scheme. Last night we 
asked the Education minister how much of that money is 
actually going to keep these brand new schools in good shape 
and how much is going into the pockets of that consortium, but 

the minister wouldn’t answer.  
 
So I’ll give him another chance, and I’ll remind him that these 
are the hard-earned dollars of Saskatchewan people. Of the 
$13.5 million in this year’s budget, how much is going to 
maintain these brand new schools, and how much is going to 
pad the bottom line of this consortium? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, first of all I reject the 
premise of the question. I mean, nobody’s pockets are being 
lined by this, Mr. Speaker. This government has committed to 
the largest infrastructure, education infrastructure build in this 
province’s history, Mr. Speaker. We’re proud of the 18 schools 
that we opened last year, Mr. Speaker. Certainly the record of 
the New Democrats when it comes to education capital is 
nothing to look to. It’s been abysmal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll answer the question directly. Of the 
maintenance and infrastructure . . . This is the question that they 
asked and they’d like the answer, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 
give it. Of the maintenance and interest, Mr. Speaker, there was 
a total of $13.5 million, Mr. Speaker. Interest accounts for $8.6 
million, with the balance of maintenance and snow removal, 
Mr. Speaker, of $4.8 million, Mr. Speaker. Those are the direct 
answers to the questions that were given in committee last 
night, which I undertake to give, and I put them on the floor of 
the House today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the numbers just don’t add 
up. They’re spending almost $50 million on maintenance for 
the 710 schools all across our province. That works out to just 
$71,000 per school. Meanwhile at the P3 schools, they’re 
spending $13.5 million to maintain and for the high interest 
costs for 18 brand new schools. That’s $750,000 for 
maintenance and interest on these new schools — 10 times 
what they’re spending on all the other, each of all of the other 
schools.  
 
Do these shiny, new schools really need 10 times the dollars, or 
will the minister finally admit that taxpayers are being ripped 
off by a deal signed by that government in their rent-a-school 
scheme? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I’ll admit nothing, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the member should go and talk to the teachers and talk 
to the parents of the children that are attending these schools 
and see how thankful that they are, Mr. Speaker, that their 
children are attending these schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the member does, the member forgets . . . 
and it’s always convenient on that side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, that they only ever get one side of the equation. These 
buildings will be maintained by the proponent for 30 years, Mr. 
Speaker. So these maintenance costs will be paid over a course 
of 30 years. And at the end of 30 years, Mr. Speaker, these 
schools will be returned. These schools will be returned to the 
maintenance of the Government of Saskatchewan in a like-new 



May 1, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4125 

condition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re very proud of the P3 schools that we built, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ll continue to put a P3 lens on any project that we do bring 
forward, Mr. Speaker. But this is a good investment for the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Saved over $100 
million, Mr. Speaker, to the taxpayers of this province by 
moving through a P3 scheme, all of which, the particulars of 
which, Mr. Speaker, are online for the opposition members to 
see. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Wage Rates in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, there are hundreds of layoffs 
coming to workers of two different mines. That’s hundreds of 
families all within entire communities of Allan and Vanscoy 
that will be impacted by these layoffs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a significant hit to our province’s economy. 
Saskatchewan’s job growth is one of the slowest in the country, 
and recent reports show that other than Newfoundland and 
Labrador, Saskatchewan has the slowest growth in weekly 
earnings since last year. So the Premier really had to twist those 
facts yesterday to highlight the exact opposite. In reality, people 
are leaving to find opportunities elsewhere. Even Brad Wall had 
to go all the way to Calgary to find a job. 
 
So what’s the plan to get our economy back on track and to 
ensure jobs for the people of the province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well personally, Mr. Speaker, I think 
it’s a ridiculous cheap shot from the NDP about our former 
premier who served this province with a huge amount of 
dedication and integrity over the course of the last decade. 
Mr. . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, a 
ridiculous cheap shot from the members opposite. The former 
premier is going to continue to reside in Saskatchewan. He’s 
working for a national law firm, and we wish him the very best, 
Mr. Speaker. And I would hope that all members would hope 
him and wish him the very best in his future endeavours. 
 
With regard to the member’s question, the reality is, on average 
weekly earnings we’ve seen an increase over the course of the 
last decade of over 38 per cent, Mr. Speaker. An increase in 
average weekly earnings, the second-highest percentage growth 
in the entire country, Mr. Speaker. Those are the facts. 
 
We’ve also seen the second-highest growth rate of job creation 
in the entire county, Mr. Speaker. And the one way, one way 
. . . We know that they only have one economic policy opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, that they’ve put on the record. And that one policy 
is a carbon tax, Mr. Speaker, and that policy will kill jobs. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is second last in 
the country. The minister can spin this all he wants, but those 
statistics are telling. Since this time last year, average weekly 
earnings grew by just 1.6 per cent in Saskatchewan. In BC 
[British Columbia], they grew by 3 per cent. In Alberta, they 
grew by 4.3 per cent, almost triple Saskatchewan’s increase. It’s 
clear that under the Sask Party’s watch, Saskatchewan workers 
are being left behind and families are finding it harder and 
harder to make ends meet. 
 
So can the minister explain why almost everywhere else in the 
country is doing better than Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite is just wrong. And I would posit, Mr. Speaker, for this 
House that if you want to see horrendous economic stats going 
forward, do exactly what they’re advocating for, Mr. Speaker. 
And what is that? What is their one single, one single economic 
policy that we know of from the members opposite? It’s to 
impose Justin Trudeau’s job-killing $2 billion carbon tax on this 
economy, Mr. Speaker. We know, we know if you want to see 
job losses, if you want to see reduced economic activity, vote 
for those members, Mr. Speaker, because their job-killing 
carbon tax will have a devastating impact on our economy. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen from the Leader of 
the Opposition a very, very weak position who advocates to 
wave the white flag, who advocates to surrender to Justin 
Trudeau, who’s called our campaign against the carbon tax a 
pointless crusade, Mr. Speaker. You know what? On this side of 
the House, under the strong leadership of our Premier, we’re 
going to continue to stand up for this province every day of the 
week, and we’re not going to apologize for it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Global Transportation Hub and Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week we heard 
that instead of selling land to Brightenview, the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] now will be leasing it. Now to lease this 
land, the GTH will buy it from the province. But they’re only 
paying a tenth of what Brightenview originally agreed to pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that land is owned by the people of Saskatchewan. 
This is taxpayer’s money we’re talking about, and they’re 
willing to sell it to the GTH for one-tenth of what it was worth. 
Mr. Speaker, the hypocrisy runs deep. How can the Sask Party 
justify this outrageously low price to the GTH when they used 
the original price, which was 10 times more, to justify a flip to 
Sask Party’s friends? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we went through this 
earlier with the members opposite. Initially, Brightenview had 
indicated they wished to purchase 30 acres. We’re willing to 
sell them 1, 2, 50, 100 acres — whatever they would like to 



4126 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2018 

purchase. We’re in the business of selling and developing that 
land. Mr. Speaker, they chose to only purchase 10 and to lease 
another 10. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’d rather they purchase more. We’d rather 
other people purchase more. And with the help of some 
members opposite, if they’d like to help us do some sales and 
speak positively about the GTH, I’m sure that would help the 
rental market and the sales market in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear. It’s the Sask Party 
who said the price Brightenview was paying justified the high 
price that was paid to the Sask Party supporters who made $11 
million.  
 
Just last week, the minister responsible for the GTH said, and I 
quote, “. . . we don’t become embroiled in the individual 
business decisions on a day-to-day basis, hour-by-hour . . .” But 
with the east parcels, we know that’s exactly what happened. 
The minister at the time had his right-hand man arrange the 
sale, even though the GTH had already hired a company to 
complete the transactions just like that one. 
 
So I ask again: how can the Sask Party justify this low price 
when they used a much higher original sale price to justify the 
land flip to Sask Party supporters? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, when we were in a period 
of rapid escalation of prices, the members opposite complained 
vigorously that, oh we shouldn’t be paying more, we shouldn’t 
be paying more.  
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, market conditions go up; market 
conditions go down. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re conscious of 
what the changes are in market conditions. They do that at 
GTH. That’s their job out there. And if market conditions have 
changed one way or the other, that’s something they intend to 
do. And the members opposite should know better than to 
complain that you can’t go up and complain one way, go down 
and complain the other. Mr. Speaker, let’s be reasonable. Let’s 
be fair, and let’s let the GTH do their job. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Administrative Segregation in Correctional Facilities 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I asked the minister 
about the use of administrative segregation in our correctional 
facilities. While I appreciated the minister’s talking points on 
what she called the most recent review in 2014, I was referring 
to her ministry’s 2016 administrative segregation report. And in 
contradiction to what the minister has claimed, this review 
found that segregation was frequently used in ways that don’t 
meet international standards and are in contrast to the ministry’s 
own policies. This report indicates this review was undertaken 
to develop alternatives to this practice and to develop a baseline 
to track progress.  

Has the minister caught up with the most recent report, and can 
she provide an update on what specific progress has been made 
to mitigate this practice? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, our most recent review, which 
focused on addressing issues that emerged during our 2014 
review, is currently in its final stages. The issues this most 
recent review is looking at include ensuring appropriate use; 
limits respecting the length of stay in administrative 
segregation; possibility of independent oversight, just as I said 
yesterday; exploration of reasonable alternatives in general; 
alternatives for inmates with mental health and cognitive 
problems; standards with respect to the conditions of 
confinement for segregated inmates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are working in light of the Charter challenges 
against Correctional Service of Canada that have also been 
identified in academic research, Mr. Speaker. We’re on the tail 
end of finishing off our review. New policies, new conditions 
will be introduced and it’s expected that these new policies will 
be followed. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister also questioned 
yesterday the link between segregation and prison capacity. 
Now that I believe she’s had the chance to read it, and she 
should now know the report’s primary recommendation was a 
review of provincial population management, saying population 
counts were the strongest barriers to reducing the use of 
segregation. The report also called for the development of a 
therapeutic unit to support the shocking number of inmates with 
mental health diagnosis and more resources to deal with 
increasingly complex behaviours. 
 
[14:15] 
 
What specific actions have been taken to provide this much 
needed support? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m really 
pleased that the member opposite brought up the issue of 
inmates in our correctional facilities with mental health 
problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have talked about the hospital in North 
Battleford will be having a secure therapeutic mental health 
facility there for inmates who are experiencing extreme to very 
tough situations, inmates with mental health issues, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I don’t know what the member is asking that question for. This 
has been talked about forever. We’re set to, very soon, be 
opening this correctional facility in North Battleford. And we’re 
very pleased and proud to be one of the first ones in Canada to 
do so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 



May 1, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4127 

Support for Mental Health and Addictions in the North 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. When 
this government announced that they were shutting down the 
Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre, it was a devastating blow 
to the community. And many people are still very angry, not 
just because those in the system had been able to stay near their 
loved ones, but it also led to the loss of good northern jobs and 
good rehabilitative services. 
 
The community of Buffalo Narrows has since bought the 
former centre, and I hope it was sold for a nominal fee of a 
dollar. Now the community is seeking government guidance 
and support for an addictions centre. Can they count on that 
commitment? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 
member from Athabasca for the question. I’ve actually spoken 
to Mayor Bobby Woods about this very thing a number of 
times. They talked about possibly having a proposal for this 
should they come into possession of the Buffalo Narrows 
facility. 
 
To date, Ministry of Health officials have tried contacting the 
community to organize a meeting. It hasn’t quite happened yet, 
but we’re looking forward to discussing with the community, 
with the mayor, and others what proposals we might look at 
when it comes to mental health and addiction services that 
could be delivered in that facility in the North. So we’re looking 
forward to that proposal coming forward. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have to remember that we are investing 
this year $11.4 million in mental health and addiction supports 
in new funding, aside from the 280-some million dollars that 
are already in the budget. And Mr. Speaker, we have to keep in 
mind too the other funds for mental health and addictions that 
do impact patients in the North when it comes to other 
ministries that, whether it’s Education or Justice, that impact 
addictions and mental health. So, Mr. Speaker, we have over 
340-some-odd million dollars going towards mental health, and 
we’re going to increase those numbers over the next coming 
years. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Your government’s 
own mental health and addictions report called on the 
government to improve access to addiction supports in northern, 
rural, and remote communities. Mr. Speaker, the ability to help 
heal northerners in their home community is an incredible 
opportunity, and the community of Buffalo Narrows has both 
the will and the way. We need these services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to hear from the minister today a commitment to not 
only sitting down and discussing the community’s opportunity 
and their plans, but to provide real support and meaningful 
resources to help get this project off the ground. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. As I 
committed to Mayor Bobby Woods conversationally — 
whether it’s at the New North summit, whether it’s through 
SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] when 
he questioned from the floor, I believe, or other conversations 
we’ve had — we’re absolutely committed to working with the 
community to see what they would put forward with a proposal, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
If we look at, even in this year’s budget, specifically targeted to 
the North is $400,000 for Prince Albert, northern 
Saskatchewan, providing specialist consultation services for 
physicians and other health care providers operating in Prince 
Albert and the North, Mr. Speaker. And I could go on to some 
of the other initiatives that we’ve put forward over the last 
couple of years. And I’m happy, if the member asks another 
question, to detail some of those, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But absolutely, we’re waiting to hear from Mayor Bobby 
Woods and the community as to what their proposal would look 
like. Ministry of Health officials are ready to take up those 
conversations as well as working with Justice and other 
ministries to see what we can do when it comes to providing 
more mental health and addiction supports for our northern 
citizens. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

National Pharmacare Program 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week we had a 
debate here in this Assembly about pharmacare and objections 
were raised on the other side about the potential problems a 
universal pharmacare program might have. And it was a little 
bit confusing in what way universal pharmacare, universal 
first-dollar care, would be worse than the current patchwork of 
programs that leave so many Saskatchewan people having to 
choose between paying their rent, paying their power bills, or 
paying for the medications they need to stay healthy. 
 
Now of course we do want to make sure it is the best program 
possible, which is exactly why — and I understand advocacy at 
the federal level has not been the strength of this provincial 
government, Mr. Speaker — but this is exactly the reason we 
need your support on this important file. And so I ask the 
Minister of Health, is he willing to stand up with us and join in 
our call for a universal, first-dollar, high-quality pharmacare 
program for all of Canada? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, what this government is 
more than willing to do is to work with the federal government, 
to work with Eric Hoskins, the former Health minister from 
Ontario who’s going to head up the review of a proposal for a 
national pharmacare program, Mr. Speaker. But we do want to 
tread cautiously because, Mr. Speaker, the opposition just 
blatantly accepts whatever’s going to come down from the 
federal government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He talked about the debate last week . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . That’s exactly the case, Mr. Speaker. What if what’s 
proposed by the federal government is actually a less 



4128 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2018 

comprehensive program than what we have in Saskatchewan? 
He makes light of it. He calls it a patchwork but, Mr. Speaker, it 
is the best in the country. What it does is ensures the most 
needy, the lowest income people are covered, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s catastrophic coverage. Anybody over 3.4 per cent of 
their income’s covered, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, I find it kind of unique. On this case, Mr. Speaker, 
he’s criticizing us. But what have they done in the past with the 
federal government, Mr. Speaker? They just capitulate. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 129 — The Saskatchewan Technology 
Start-up Incentive Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I rise today to move the second reading of The 
Saskatchewan Technology Start-up Incentive Act. This new 
legislation is designed to increase investment in early-stage 
technology start-ups in our province. It will do this by offering 
a competitive 45 per cent non-refundable tax credit for 
individual, corporate, and venture capital corporations investing 
in eligible technology-based start-ups. This will be capped at a 
maximum annual benefit of $140,000 per investor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a growing technology sector. It 
employs about 5,000 people and, according to Statistics 
Canada, it contributes 1.45 billion to the province’s economy. 
Several technology companies and start-ups in the province 
offer innovative products and solutions used in Saskatchewan, 
across Canada, and in other parts of the world. In addition, 
Co.Labs, the province’s first technology incubator which started 
barely a year ago, coached and mentored 37 technology 
start-ups in its very first year of operations. 
 
It is obvious that there is a lot of momentum in this sector, and 
the Government of Saskatchewan recognizes its immense value 
and potential. For example, according to Statistics Canada, 
Saskatoon is Canada’s second fastest growing technology job 
market, trailing only Waterloo. There have been a number of 
significant developments in the province’s tech sector in the 
past few months. Siemens acquired Saskatoon semiconductor 
company Solido in the biggest technology deal in the province’s 
history. Siemens has big plans to grow their new Saskatoon 
office. 
 
7Shifts and Coconut Software, two rapidly growing rising stars 
in our tech sector, each closed Series A investment rounds in 
the ballpark of 5 million. And local technology companies 
Vendasta and Solido were named Deloitte’s top 50 fastest 
growing companies in Canada. 
 
There’s a lot of energy in this sector, and our government wants 
to see this rapid growth continue. And this is why we are 
committed to fostering the best and most forward-looking 

business environment possible to support the sector’s expansion 
and successes in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that technology start-ups identify access 
to capital as the number one barrier to the growth of their 
companies and the sector. This is particularly acute for 
female-run entrepreneurial enterprises. This could lead them to 
moving their young, rapidly growing companies out of 
Saskatchewan to access investment in other jurisdictions. 
 
Removing the barriers to securing early stage investment, 
typically referred to as angel investment, is critical for our 
province because they outperform non-angel-backed companies 
in sales growth, employment growth, wages paid, research and 
development expenditures, and profits. They tend to employ 
highly skilled workers and they grow entrepreneurial talent and 
management expertise, and often spur spinoff companies and 
economic activity. 
 
The province currently has the smallest venture and angel 
capital pool in Western Canada, and is also the only one 
without an investor tax credit program for technology-based 
start-ups. This needs to be addressed, Mr. Speaker. This pace 
and scope of technological change continues to accelerate 
through every sector of the global economy and, as such, 
Saskatchewan’s prosperity is increasingly tied to its ability to 
foster strong innovation commercialization outcomes. 
 
Studies suggest that purposeful government intervention is vital 
to developing a healthy technology start-up ecosystem, though 
no single intervention can achieve this on its own. Establishing 
a leading incentive to grow the number and size of 
Saskatchewan technology start-ups is key to achieving this 
ecosystem. It will help the province hold its own in the 
increasingly competitive areas of innovation commercialization, 
as well as talent attraction and retention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan technological start-up incentive 
Act builds on the best practices of a proven policy solution 
implemented in other Western Canadian jurisdictions, and is 
tailored to address the challenges faced by Saskatchewan 
technology start-ups in accessing patient and risk-tolerant 
capital. 
 
The program’s features and benefits, including a 45 per cent tax 
credit rate and the ability to claim up to 140,000 per year in tax 
credits, make it one of the most appealing incentive programs 
available compared to other western jurisdictions. It will 
address a critical funding gap for Saskatchewan 
technology-based start-ups. As a two-and-a-half-year pilot 
program, the Saskatchewan technology start-up incentive will 
grow the province’s innovation ecosystem and will become a 
key investment and talent attraction tool in its own right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new program will complement other recent 
innovation commercialization policies and programs 
government has developed, for example: Co.Labs, the 
province’s first technology incubator; the reformed 
Saskatchewan research development tax credit; and the 
Saskatchewan commercial innovation incentive. 
 
To qualify for the program, eligible technology-based start-ups 
must be located in Saskatchewan. They must also have 50 



May 1, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4129 

employers or fewer with at least 50 per cent of those employees 
located here in the province. The Saskatchewan technology 
start-up incentive will be managed by Innovation Saskatchewan 
and will be funded through the agency’s $7.2 million surplus 
funds, which will support tax expenditures and program 
administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to inform you that in developing 
this program, Innovation Saskatchewan worked very closely 
with the Ministry of Trade and Export Development. The 
program also has the support of Saskatchewan’s investor 
community, which has been requesting an angel investment tax 
credit for several years. And of course the technology sector 
itself is also very, very supportive of this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very, very pleased to move the second reading 
of The Saskatchewan Technology Start-up Incentive Act. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
second reading motion moved by the minister that Bill No. 129, 
The Saskatchewan Technology Start-up Incentive Act be now 
read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And as 
is becoming the norm in the Assembly here, I’m very pleased to 
stand up in my place and give the initial comments on the bill 
being proposed by the current government on many fronts, but 
more in particular The Saskatchewan Technology Start-up 
Incentive Act. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I understand that this particular Act is a 
pilot project in nature, that there is an effort to recognize that 
there are potential opportunities when you look at the 
technology and the start-up of the technology on some 
innovative approach that Saskatchewan companies may have, 
or other companies that want to relocate to Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s very, very important that as a province 
we continue being a place where investment is attracted to, and 
we have to be all that we can be as a province to attract 
companies of all sorts to the province of Saskatchewan. So it’s 
really, really important for the people of Saskatchewan to know, 
from our perspective as the opposition, these are some of the 
things that we pay very close attention to. 
 
And the reason why we pay close attention to these particular 
bills, Mr. Speaker, is that we must ensure that the desired effect 
of bills like this is being achieved by the Sask Party government 
and that they’re not simply going through the motions of 
making these bills and making these incentive programs and 
putting them in place, and then people aren’t really taking the 
province up on this opportunity because there’s some rule or 
some process or some hindrance that would prevent the 
companies from locating to Saskatchewan or building a 
business here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s fine to look at the fact that you want to 
have targeted incentives. And the minister made reference to 
companies having fewer than 50 employees, that 50 per cent of 

their employees must be based in Saskatchewan, their head 
office must be located in the province. And some of the other 
points, Mr. Speaker, is that . . . [inaudible] . . . over the bill, like 
not having previously raised over $5 million in equity capital. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s important for the opposition to know 
what the desired effect is, as I mentioned. It’s also important to 
know what particular companies that we want to keep or attract 
here. What is the objective attached to this particular bill? These 
are the important points that we need to research and we need to 
find out. And we also need to network with various companies 
out there that may have issues or may have problems with how 
the incentive program is being built. 
 
Now we saw evidence time and time again from the 
Saskatchewan Party of how they have made many messes of 
many files, Mr. Speaker. And I would point out under the 
Energy and Resources department, they had a program that was 
talking about companies that will want to set up in 
Saskatchewan for oil and gas. And yet they made reference to 
60,000 barrels of oil or less, Mr. Speaker, as one of the 
parameters for operating that incentive program. Well no one 
took advantage of that program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now I’m hoping that this particular program under Bill 
129, that there are people taking advantage of these programs. 
Because it’s really important to know from our perspective that 
this is not another shell game, that this is not the government 
announcing a bunch of incentive programs that nobody’s going 
to take advantage of, and all it is is just money in the books to 
make their finances look balanced, Mr. Speaker, when in fact 
some of the parameters on some of these incentive programs 
make it impossible for companies to come and thrive in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is the reason why we have to make every effort to 
understand what exactly the targeted objectives of these bills 
are. What companies are we trying to attract and why were 
certain rules put under these incentive programs? We need to 
know those details, and this is the reason why we need to speak 
to as many companies as we can. 
 
On this side of the Assembly we embrace the fact that there are 
many companies that have some very unique ideas when it 
comes to technology. Some are based in Saskatchewan; others 
are based throughout the world. And do we want to attract that 
mindset here? Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. Do we want to attract 
that investment here? Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. But it’s 
important that, as a province, that we get it right — we make 
sure that, if we’re going to embark on this particular journey, 
that we get it right. 
 
And that’s the reason why it’s important, from our perspective 
as the opposition, that we go through these bills. And we 
encourage people that may be listening to the Legislative 
Assembly to participate and give us information that they feel is 
important, to make sure that the objective of this bill is met with 
the greatest of investment and greatest of opportunity for 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. That’s so very important 
and vitally important, and that’s the role that the opposition 
plays. 
 
So as we look through Bill 129, we have a lot of questions. As I 



4130 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2018 

said at the outset, we are encouraged that we need to look at all 
venues of opportunity in the province of Saskatchewan, because 
we have seen how our finances have suffered over the years 
under the management of the Sask Party. We have seen the 
crisis in grain transportation. We have seen the fact that they 
have not built one inch of pipe to tidewater, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
seeing the challenge in getting our product to market. 
 
So in the event that we have a government that can’t produce on 
the larger challenges that the people of Saskatchewan face in 
this day and age as a landlocked province, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
important that we also say, look, there’s other areas that we 
need to always pay attention to. And technology’s one of the 
areas that we should. 
 
And based on their record, Mr. Speaker, of how they’ve 
managed the big files and how they’ve failed miserably on that 
front, this is the reason — on any new initiative that prompts 
investment, attraction of young, intelligent companies to our 
province — we have to make sure we take the time to 
understand what the bill is all about so we can help them 
achieve the desired effect, Mr. Speaker. We hope that this is not 
a shell game and we hope that this isn’t meant just to balance 
their books without spending any money, because money is 
accounted in the books but not expended. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
that shouldn’t be the norm when we’re trying to create an 
economy that is firing on all cylinders, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But again, based on the point that I raised earlier, they have 
made a terrible mess of getting our product to market as a 
provincial government. So any incentive, any initiative that they 
have, it is incumbent that we as the opposition stand in our 
place, assess this, share our views with the people of 
Saskatchewan, and understand as best we can what the 
objectives are, and to make sure that the Saskatchewan Party 
follow through with some of their announcements here and that 
this isn’t merely an exercise and a shell game to pad their 
finances to continue to hoodwink the people of Saskatchewan 
on the incredible bad job that they’re doing of managing our 
finances and managing our economy, Mr. Speaker. Because 
again, the place that we’re at financially is a direct result of the 
Sask Party’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 
 
We need to make sure that every bill is thoroughly vetted and 
thoroughly discussed and thoroughly understood by the 
opposition and by the people of Saskatchewan, because we 
simply cannot trust the Sask Party anymore. They have to go, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
On that note, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 129, 
The Saskatchewan Technology Start-up Incentive Act, 2018. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 129, The Saskatchewan Technology 
Start-up Incentive Act. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 127 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 127 — The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise today to enter into the debate around Bill No. 127, The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018. Now luckily I sit next to my 
esteemed colleague from Saskatoon Fairview, who is always 
prepared when it comes to adjourned debates and was very 
helpful and instrumental in helping me prepare for my remarks 
about 30 seconds ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this legislation is actually quite interesting. And I’m looking 
forward to the critic on this file having the opportunity to ask 
questions of the minister at committee, because what it’s doing 
is essentially walking back a promise that we saw the 
government give during the last budget cycle. So during the last 
budget cycle for the 2017-2018 budget, there was a promise to 
reduce the personal income tax rates. And their promise in 2017 
was this was going to be done in two stages, with an initial 
half-point reduction on July 1st, 2017 and then a second 
half-point reduction on July 1st, 2019. 
 
And what does this bill do, Mr. Speaker, but it — as in the 
minister’s own words — it “. . . will temporarily suspend the 
tax rate reduction plan,” Mr. Speaker. And that’s from the 
minister’s second reading speech about this bill. This is yet 
another example of many examples of the reality of this 
government, a government that has no long-term plan, that 
clearly had no idea what they were doing when they put 
forward the last budget. We’ve seen walk-backs and promises 
broken left, right, and centre on the last budget, and now we’re 
seeing another example of that in this bill today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Like I said, I’m really looking forward to our critic having the 
opportunity to ask questions of the minister about this 
walk-back, this plan change, this promise no longer kept, Mr. 
Speaker. So with that in mind, I am prepared and ready to allow 
Bill No. 127 to move on to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
that the minister, that Bill No. 127, The Income Tax Amendment 
Act, 2018 be now read a second time. Pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 



May 1, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4131 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 127, The Income 
Tax Amendment Act, 2018 be committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 
Bill No. 128 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 128 — The 
Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2018 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise this afternoon to enter into the debate around Bill No. 128, 
The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, from 
what I understand, the purpose of this bill is to implement some 
PST initiatives that were announced on April . . . during the 
2018-2019 provincial budget. To further that change and to 
implement that change, Mr. Speaker, some specific 
amendments are needed to The Provincial Sales Tax Act. 
 
One to remove the PST exemption for used light vehicles 
effective April 11, 2018. Another one to reinstate the trade-in 
allowance so that the PST will only be paid on the difference in 
price between the trade-in and the purchased vehicle. And a 
third to exempt from PST from the private sale of used vehicles 
with a purchase price of up to $5,000. 
 
This is an interesting change, Mr. Speaker, as it’s in complete 
contrast from what we heard the former premier say when he 
was Leader of the Opposition about this specific measure. And 
he said that essentially a tax on a tax, which is what this is, is 
not a good idea. And I’m actually saying it nicer than he said it 
at that time. And now what we’re seeing is again like I was 
talking about with the last bill I was speaking to: another 
walk-back, another change of plans, Mr. Speaker, from this 
government. 
 
And I’ve been hearing and I know my colleagues as well have 
been hearing a lot of concerns about this change. And I know 
sometimes when we talk about this in question period members 
opposite will yell to us that it’s in line with the other 
jurisdictions across the country, Mr. Speaker. Well, you know, 
that doesn’t change the fact that people across the province are 
actually really upset over this change. 
 
What we’re hearing in particular is the unfairness when they 
have reached a sale agreement with a private buyer and a 
private seller and then they go to SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance] to have it registered and they have to 
pay the red book value, Mr. Speaker, which is sometimes 
thousands of dollars higher than what the purchase price was 

for that vehicle. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And I was actually looking at some Facebook posts about this 
particular issue just a few days ago. There’s quite a few folks 
who are speaking up against this change on social media, Mr. 
Speaker, and one of them had asked the individual that worked 
at SGI, well if this is the red book value, is this what I would 
get from SGI should this car have been totalled? And they said 
no, actually they wouldn’t. So SGI won’t replace the vehicle for 
that amount but they will make someone pay PST for that 
amount, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting to see, from this government, an intrusion into a 
private sale between private individuals first of all; a second 
level of taxation, Mr. Speaker, on an asset that has already 
received tax on it, Mr. Speaker; and thirdly, a valuation that 
SGI actually wouldn’t honour if that particular vehicle had been 
totalled, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the concerns on this issue are growing. The voices are 
getting quite loud, and I hope members opposite are listening. 
But sometimes I wonder if they ever are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I know that the minister will have the opportunity to ask 
questions about that and many other issues around this bill at 
committee. I look forward to her having that opportunity, so 
with that in mind, I am prepared to allow Bill No. 128 to move 
to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 128, The Provincial Sales Tax 
Amendment Act, 2018 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill 128, The Provincial 
Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2018 be committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 107 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Makowsky that Bill No. 107 — The 
Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 



4132 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2018 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
always good to take my place in this Assembly and rise and join 
on the debates of the day. The signs are up already, Mr. 
Speaker, and this one’s a particular pleasure in terms of the 
affairs of the province. And I, of course, am up in a debate on 
Bill No. 107, An Act to amend The Provincial Emblems and 
Honours Act. 
 
Well it’s a storied tale that goes straight . . . It’s quite the tale 
that goes along with this one, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know if it’s 
to scale, that tale, but we’ll give it a whirl. 
 
But you know, this government, not content to have a contest, 
wherein they had a contest, I believe, which you were very 
familiar with, Mr. Speaker. Not to involve the Speaker in the 
debate. But a contest to decide the provincial dinosaur, the 
provincial dinosaur . . . or pardon me, no, not the dinosaur — 
the fossil, which was the provincial fossil. 
 
Now of course casting my gaze around this Chamber, I’m sure 
there were a lot of, lot of horses in the running, Mr. Speaker. 
You know, prehistoric horses of course. But in terms of this, the 
final seven that made the cut for that contest, it’s a list worth 
reviewing, Mr. Speaker. And then of course getting up to the 
big reveal as the Speaker’s already laid down the signs for. But 
in terms of that crisp November day, 2015 at the Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum — favourite place for so many of us in 
this province — where the big reveal took place in terms of the 
seven fossils that were in the running. 
 
And of course the seven options, the first one up was Mo. The 
first fossil up was Mo. I don’t know, like you know, is it history 
repeating itself? Or where we are in this time-space continuum, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to figure that out sometimes. But of 
course the first nominee was Mo the long-necked plesiosaur, 
found near Ponteix. You know, that’s a that’s a good one. 
That’s an honourable nomination there. They rule, I think is 
what my colleague from Saskatoon Centre is saying. In terms of 
it being a 30-foot long marine reptile, a new species in science 
when it was discovered. And you know, great thing, Mr. 
Speaker, great thing. 
 
And then of course, not satisfied with that, the next nominee 
was Scotty. So first we’ve got Mo and then we’ve got Scotty, 
the Tyrannosaurus rex discovered near Eastend. So again for 
those following along at home, Mr. Speaker, to be very clear, 
first one was Mo and then there was Scotty, in terms of the 
fossil contest that this government held and again which you’re 
very familiar with, Mr. Speaker. So I don’t know if, reading the 
tea leaves on that one, Mr. Speaker, where the future of the 
province is going to wind up. Who’s going to win the contest? 
Who is going to win the contest for the fossil? You know, who 
knew it would have so much to do with other matters germane 
to the affairs of the province? 
 
A long-necked austerity-osaurus was not in the running, with 
thanks to my colleague from Regina Rosemont. So again, first 
up was Mo. And then there was Scotty, of course, the 
Tyrannosaurus rex found out by Eastend, one of the great sort 
of dinosaur fossil beds out there in the province, and certainly 

proudly on display. But the T. rex at Eastend, of course one of 
the largest and most complete T. rex skeletons ever found. A 
great thing, Mr. Speaker. So first we had Mo, then we had 
Scotty. And you know, I’d pretty much call it a contest right 
there. 
 
Yes like, you know, no need for down ballots in that one, Mr. 
Speaker. Winner, winner, T. rex dinner. Like there we go. 
 
But there were of course other entrants in the contest, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’d be remiss if we didn’t give them their due. 
But certainly there was the Kyle Mammoth, the Kyle 
Mammoth, a 12,000-year-old giant elephant-like woolly 
mammoth, the Kyle Mammoth. I don’t know if I’m hearing 
rumblings about the contest from Walsh Acres. I don’t know 
what’s going on over there, but you know, okay. 
 
Then there was the Herschel Short-necked Plesiosaur. The 
Plesiosaur’s, of course, reminding us that once upon a time this 
was all under water, Mr. Speaker. No sort of tangents to go off 
on the budget on this end, Mr. Speaker, but certainly the 
Herschel Short-necked Plesiosaur. And then of course there was 
the Brontothere, the rhino-like mammal found near Eastend — 
again that great fossil bed out in Eastend — from 35 million 
years ago. 
 
My personal favourite, if . . . You know, sometimes when 
you’re a legislator, Mr. Speaker, you don’t get to vote in these 
things. But I’ve got to get on the record here at this point and 
say that I’ve always had a lot of love in my heart for Big Bert, 
the most complete and best-preserved specimen of the 
92-million-year-old crocodile found near Carrot River. I’m 
hearing a lot of Big Bert love from the other side there, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s some good represent going on out of Carrot 
River Valley, you know. But Big Bert, of course, hardly got out 
of the gates. And well when you’ve got Mo and Scotty ahead of 
the pack like, you know, it pretty much writes itself there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And then last but certainly not least in the rounding out the 
field, Mr. Speaker, a vegetarian, a vegetarian in the field, the 
Thescelosaurus, a plant-eating dinosaur species unique to 
Saskatchewan, again hailing from that wonderful fossil grounds 
out in Eastend, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I don’t know, I don’t know if they all had scrutineers in for 
the contest or if they figured, you know, Mo was, you know, 
out so far in front of the pack that, would Scotty catch him? 
You know, would Big Bert’s hopes be realized? You know, 
how this would all work out, Mr. Speaker. But again it’s most 
interesting that this government would have a fossil contest, and 
completely lacking any sort of sense of irony or any sort of like, 
you know, no write-in ballots in terms of ways to zeek your 
caucus colleagues, Mr. Speaker, or practical joke your caucus 
colleagues. 
 
But I’m not sure how many ballots it went. Perhaps we could 
figure that out a little bit later behind the bar, Mr. Speaker. But 
certainly, you know, when your options are Mo and Scotty, 
that’s a pretty tough decision there, Mr. Speaker. But of course 
Scotty, the Tyrannosaurus rex from Eastend, prevailed. And 
you know, as is the king of the dinosaurs, you know, so it goes. 
So that contest was decided. 



May 1, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4133 

And you know, hindsight being 20/20, were there lessons that 
we could’ve taken from that, you know, who’s the most popular 
fossil contest, Mr. Speaker, for other races that took place in the 
province? And you know, could we have but thought, well this 
is pretty plain what’s going to happen here, I’m sure maybe that 
would’ve influenced some of the wagering that went on in 
terms of various of the contests. Or in terms of the 
endorsements, you know, who knows what would’ve happened 
there? But hindsight always being 20/20, there it is, Scotty 
emerging as the king in terms of Saskatchewan fossils. 
 
So not being satisfied with just having a contest, it’s now been 
moved into The Provincial Emblems and Honours Act. And of 
course, we’ve got the Act to amend The Provincial Emblems 
and Honours Act, Bill No. 107, with the section 7.3 being added 
after section 7.2 wherein: 
 

Fossil emblem 
7.3 The fossil of the species known as Tyrannosaurus 
rex and called ‘T. rex’ is the fossil emblem of 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Obviously this is an idea that’s time has come. I’m glad to see 
the government taking urgent action, both in having a contest 
and then bringing forth legislation to enshrine the results of that 
contest in legislation, Mr. Speaker, in terms of settling once and 
for all which fossil is top of the pops for this government and 
for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So the people have spoken: T. rex is king. And with that, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d urge my colleague, the Government House Leader, 
to do what he needs to do to move this pressing piece of 
legislation on to committee so that it might be enshrined in law. 
Thank you much. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the minister that Bill No. 107, The Provincial 
Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 107, The 
Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2017 be 
committed to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 94 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cox that Bill No. 94 — The 
Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings 
(SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to enter into debate as it relates to Bill No. 94, The 
Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings 
(SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017. This is a disappointing piece of 
legislation by the Sask Party government and it represents 
another attack on students within our province who in this case 
were just looking to save for their future to provide for themself 
that opportunity that education provides. 
 
And it has a real impact on families all across the province that 
are working hard to put a little bit away to plan for 
post-secondary education, for students that are working to put a 
little bit away for post-secondary education, and an education 
that all too often is getting further and further away, that’s 
getting less and less accessible with barriers becoming larger 
for students all across our province because of the actions of the 
Sask Party government who have really gone at the 
post-secondary education system in a way that’s caused 
damage, in a way that’s made education much less accessible 
for students all across Saskatchewan, particularly for rural 
students all across Saskatchewan, having a massive increase to 
the cost of tuition year after year, Mr. Speaker, because of the 
underfunding of this government. And then of course the costs 
and consequences as well of underfunding our incredible 
post-secondary institutions across our province — Sask 
Polytechnic, regional colleges, our universities, Mr. Speaker — 
who are feeling a lot of hurt because of the choices of the Sask 
Party government and a failure to recognize the importance of 
advanced education, higher education to the future of our 
province. 
 
[15:00] 
 
You know, it’s almost day after day that we see another 
consequence of the Sask Party’s underfunding and cuts being 
rolled out across our province. We’ve witnessed of course the 
4.8 per cent increase to tuition at the University of 
Saskatchewan, something that President Peter Stoicheff has 
stated directly is a consequence of last year’s devastating 
budget from the Sask Party government. That’s real, Mr. 
Speaker, a real barrier, a real impact for students across our 
province, or prospective students. 
 
And the problem is that when we see tuition increases like that 
all across our province, it shuts students out. It shuts out far too 
many from being able to access post-secondary education. Of 
course that limits their future, Mr. Speaker, but it limits the 
future of our province. It’s not in our interest from an economic 
perspective, a social perspective. It’s short sighted, Mr. 
Speaker, much like what we see on many other fronts with this 
tired, worn-out Sask Party government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the actual bill that’s been brought forward here, if 
you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, actually peels away what was a 



4134 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2018 

modest support for families that are saving for education. The 
program that was in place allowed for families to put a little bit 
away into a registered education savings plan, an RESP. And a 
small portion of that was then matched by the provincial 
government, a bit of an incentive to save and a little bit of 
support, and modest support at that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What it represented was matching the investment into an RESP 
up to 10 per cent to a maximum of $250 per child per year. So 
if a family were in a position, and so many families simply 
aren’t in the position to do this, but if a family were in a 
position to put away $1,000 a year for their child to build some 
support for post-secondary, the province would then contribute 
$100, and an investment would be made of $1,100 in that fiscal 
year. It would grow in time for that student, certainly 
supporting that family a little bit in saving for that 
ever-increasing cost to post-secondary education. 
 
But if you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, at the same time as this 
Sask Party government has cut funding and forced tuition to go 
through the roof, at the same time as this Sask Party 
government has cut funding to post-secondary institutions 
which has caused layoffs and job losses at our post-secondary 
institutions, degradation of programs across our province, 
they’re actually eliminating this very practical savings tool that 
families had across our province. And I think it represents again 
a government, a Sask Party government that’s tired, worn out, 
but more than that simply out of line with the realities that face 
Saskatchewan people and families. 
 
And if you think of the reality that faces young families out in 
rural Saskatchewan as the example, Mr. Speaker, who are 
hoping to support the education of their child, Mr. Speaker, this 
is a government that’s making things much, much harder on this 
front. Because of course if you’re in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s not just the tuition which is significant and major 
increases that we’ve seen being brought upon students because 
of the Sask Party’s choices on this front to tuition, but of course 
you have significant housing costs as well, relocation costs as 
well. 
 
And I see benches opposite with the Sask Party that are filled 
with a bunch of members that actually have been elected to 
serve rural communities on this front, Mr. Speaker. And I 
certainly don’t see any leadership or voice from those members 
to make sure that rural students, that rural families have the 
supports that they need to access post-secondary. And that hurts 
of course our economy as a whole. It certainly hurts those 
young people and those young families that are working so 
hard, Mr. Speaker. And so the impacts are many. 
 
As I say, day after day we see the impacts of the Sask Party’s 
choices to underfund and to cut post-secondary education. We 
see it with the 4.8 per cent increase to tuition at the University 
of Saskatchewan. We see it with job losses in important 
programs across our province. We see it in the school of Social 
Work out of the University of Regina, for students in Saskatoon 
that no longer have options for the needed courses that they 
need to conclude their degrees, Mr. Speaker, and get out and do 
the meaningful work that we need those social workers doing 
all across the province. 
 
So because of the very cuts of this government, they’re leaving 

students stranded. And worse, they’re leaving students that have 
invested a lot of time, a lot of money, a lot of energy to get to 
the place that they are right now, leaving them stranded within 
that program. And it’s past time that the Sask Party step up and 
provide those students within the Faculty of Social Work, and 
students all across our province, the kind of certainty and 
supports that they deserve and need. But instead they’re going 
the other way. 
 
You know, I opened up the sports page this morning, Mr. 
Speaker, in the Regina Leader-Post and I saw another 
consequence of underfunding, insufficient resources for 
post-secondary. I saw the cut, if you can imagine, to the 
nationally renowned, the nationally proud U of R [University of 
Regina] wrestling team, Mr. Speaker. We saw the same to the 
men’s volleyball team. These are costs, these are consequences 
of the Sask Party’s choices in their underfunding. 
 
That wrestling program, Mr. Speaker, is something that our 
whole province has been proud of. It’s something that the 
University of Regina is proud of. And I know so many wrestlers 
today and over the years that have competed as wrestlers all 
around the world in an international forum, Mr. Speaker, made 
Saskatchewan proud, made Canada proud, and doing all of that 
while they were pursuing an education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think of Leo McGee who built that program over there 
for decades, Mr. Speaker, a legend in the wrestling community, 
Mr. Speaker. And I think of so many others that have dedicated 
their lives to that program, volunteered their time for the 
betterment of that program. But I know as well, I know those 
that have dedicated their time to that program, who have 
volunteered as coaches long after they were athletes, Mr. 
Speaker. They were doing so with recognition to what that sport 
means for the development of individuals and students, and the 
opportunity that it provided them and what it can offer so many 
others. 
 
So we’re at a pretty sad time within Saskatchewan where we 
see a government making choices that’s making post-secondary 
education so much less accessible, placing barriers in front of so 
many students to ever access post-secondary education. A 
government that’s making choices that are cutting programs and 
laying off staff and degrading programs. A government that’s 
making choices to leave students like those in the Faculty of 
Social Work stranded without certainty that they’re going to be 
able to complete their degree and put that degree and that 
knowledge and that learning and that passion to use within our 
province for the greater good of all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we see a government that’s attacking programs that have 
made Regina and Saskatchewan and the University of Regina 
proud through athletics, recognizing that athletics are important 
within the life of a community, the life of a university, and 
certainly the life of a student. 
 
And I just think it’s a very sad day that the Sask Party has, you 
know, underfunded education to the point that they have, that 
we’re now losing that nationally renowned wrestling program at 
the University of Regina, a program built by so many, a 
program that’s supported the development of so many 
exceptional athletes, Mr. Speaker. And so many of those 
athletes then that went out and utilized their education, but also 



May 1, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4135 

all that learning through sport as well, Mr. Speaker, within our 
province. 
 
So I hope it’s serving as a wake-up call to this new minister and 
certainly the new Premier, Mr. Speaker, and a recognition that 
there’s consequences to their choices and their behaviour. And I 
hope there’s immediate action to address these matters, to 
address the tuition, to address the job loss, to address the 
degradation to programs that they’re causing, to address the 
cuts that are so disappointing in athletics, Mr. Speaker, that we 
see at the University of Regina right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I sure hope they reconsider this legislation, Mr. Speaker, 
legislation that supported families to put just a little bit away, 
matching them with a very modest percentage of dollars 
supporting them in that investment, Mr. Speaker. And so I sure 
hope they scrap this legislation. And I sure hope they work to 
make sure that there’s some support in place once again for 
parents and for students across our province. And I hope this 
Sask Party wakes up to the reality that they’re not serving a 
whole province, that they’re not serving their constituents. 
 
And when I look across the other way, Mr. Speaker, that 
government won a large majority in the last election. Of course 
we know they weren’t straight with Saskatchewan people on a 
whole lot of fronts. But what I witness now, Mr. Speaker, are 
rural member after rural member after rural member that fails to 
stand up for their constituents. Because when you’re hiking the 
cost of tuition along with the cost of housing and all the other 
impacts to post-secondary education, it hits those in rural 
Saskatchewan particularly hard. 
 
And I would urge this government to sit down at some kitchen 
tables across this province, to get a reality check as far as the 
household economics for hard-working families across our 
province. Families that are facing job loss, far too many 
families that are working two and three jobs to keep their head 
above water, working in precarious employment, and simply 
not in the position that they should be and that they want to be 
to support the education of young people across our province. 
 
So I see a Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, that’s worn out, 
that’s tired, that’s out of touch with the reality that faces 
Saskatchewan people and families, and sadly are no longer 
willing to even represent the interests of the people that they’ve 
been entrusted to represent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with Bill No. 94, I guess at some point the government’s 
going to try to ram this through committee, try to ram this 
through the legislature, just like they rammed through the 
sell-off of STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] or, 
you know, the bill to try to sell off the Crown corporations, Mr. 
Speaker. But I sure hope, I sure hope that they start to think 
about those they serve. 
 
I sure hope they start to think about the consequences of their 
choices. I sure hope they start to think about what this piece of 
legislation and scrapping this tool that allowed some support for 
families saving hard for education across our province, I sure 
hope they reconsider that, that they pull this piece of damaging 
legislation back, that they support families that are saving 
across the province and of course very importantly, that they 
step up with the investment needed to support post-secondary 

education to make sure that tuition is accessible, to make sure 
that there are supports for students when it comes to housing, 
and to make sure that there’s a recognition for the importance of 
programs across our province who are right now being 
devastated by underfunding. 
 
So I implore the government to get to work, to step up, to not 
watch programs get scrapped under their watch, to instead 
realize that we shouldn’t stand by and let this happen. And 
certainly I implore them to scrap this damaging Bill No. 94 that 
takes away just a modest bit of support for students and families 
who are working hard to save for education across our province. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 94, the Saskatchewan advantage 
grant for educational savings amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be committed? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 94, The 
Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings 
(SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 85 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Heppner that Bill No. 85 — The 
Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise this afternoon to add my 2 cents into the debate around Bill 
No. 85, The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act. Now 
based on my understanding of this bill, it will allow for the 
minister to now require that a site holder has provided 
acceptable financial assurance before a closed site can be 
accepted into an institutional control program. 
 
Now there’s some questions around the ministerial authority for 
that, as well as what the acceptable financial assurance will be. 



4136 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2018 

There’s also a new section that outlines that the minister can 
transfer a closed site from the institutional control program to a 
responsible person. It also allows for a new section . . . or 
there’s also a new section, Mr. Speaker, that allows the minister 
to appoint a fund advisory committee to advise on the 
Institutional Control Monitoring and Maintenance Fund and the 
Institutional Control Unforeseen Events Fund which I think will 
be dealing mostly on the long-term investment of those funds. 
 
Based on my understanding of the bill, this committee will be 
exempt from liability for any investment decisions that the 
committee may make, which leaves a few questions around 
who will have liability then, should there be something that 
goes south. If it’s the minister that therefore accepts liability, 
that’s not usual that . . . Usually there’s Crown immunity 
clauses in these pieces of legislation, so I’d be surprised if that’s 
the case, Mr. Speaker. But there are some questions around that 
and how that’s supposed to work. Now based on what we’re 
seeing so far, it looks like the committee will be comprised 
exclusively of employees that work within the Ministry of 
Economy. 
 
The bill will also maintain that the minister must conduct a 
review of the Act every five years, but it also removes the 
specifics on who this review must consult, and the requirement 
to review that the money in the funds is sufficient to meet the 
needs of the sites accepted into the program. Now what I 
understand, the stakeholders involved in this area are quite 
supportive of the five years, but there’s some serious concerns 
about what will happen when they’re reviewing specific 
agencies and entities and who is going to be consulted on those 
sorts of reviews, Mr. Speaker, when the legislation removes 
specifics around who the consultation has to comprise of. 
That’s a little alarming, and it’s just particularly alarming for 
stakeholders, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I know that the critic is going to have some opportunity to 
ask some questions of the minister at committee. I know he’s 
looking forward to that opportunity, so I’m prepared to allow 
Bill No. 85 to move to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 85, The Reclaimed Industrial Sites 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 85, The 
Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017 be committed 
to the Standing Committee on Economy. 

The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Economy. 
 

Bill No. 126 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Eyre that Bill No. 126 — The Energy 
Export Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to enter 
into debate on Bill 126, An Act respecting Energy Exports. And 
it’s a serious matter that we find ourselves in for sure, and so 
it’s appropriate for us to be having this debate. It’s appropriate 
for us to make sure there are no unintended consequences, it’s 
thoughtful, and it is the right piece of legislation. 
 
Our position, our party position, our caucus position has been 
clear now for some time that this is a federal project that’s in 
Saskatchewan interests and it needs to go forward. We do 
support a triple bottom line on that process that is well known, 
that has been accepted for some time, that ensures all three — 
social, economic, and environmental — benefits and that there 
is appropriate assessment to make sure the risk is appropriate. 
 
And we know that the National Energy Board process has gone 
through with this and the permits are in place, but the Trudeau 
Liberals really do need to step up. They really need to show 
leadership to ensure that this project gets built. It’s one that they 
have approved. They do have the jurisdiction, and it’s in the 
national interest as well as the provincial interest that this work 
gets done. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we do support the workers at Evraz. I 
understand there is some 1,100 workers at Evraz who will be 
supplying the pipe for this project. And it’s not just a small 
amount. This is 75 per cent of the pipe for this project. So we 
want to make sure that this is done, that this work they have, we 
have within this province the interest for creating the jobs and 
maintaining jobs. And this is what we do, what people do at 
Evraz. They make pipe. 
 
But we do have some deep concerns about what the Sask Party 
has done really in terms of the issues that are related to this, 
particularly in climate change. And they have lost any 
credibility that they might have had to make sure these kind of 
projects get built and that they can garner the support through 
the communities to make sure that they are listened to with 
respect. And they’ve done this for a couple of reasons that 
they’ve lost the respect and the credibility in the communities. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we have said this. We say it over again 
because it’s a fact and it’s one that they hate to hear. But you 
know, during the 10, now going on 11 years of being in 
government, they have failed to lay a single inch of pipeline to 
tidewater. What a record that is. What a record. They love to get 
up and they love to speak about their record, but when it comes 
down to actual actions, it’s just not happening. They have failed 
to lay a single inch of pipe to tidewater. And they begin to 
chirp. They begin to chirp. They want to have a different 
version of reality, maybe an alternate set of reality, but this is 
the fact. 



May 1, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4137 

And then the irony — I say this as the Environment critic — 
they’ve cut funding for climate change and green energy. 
Eighteen per cent they’ve cut this year’s budget in the climate 
change branch. And what a time to be doing it when we need 
the resources. We look at their plans and they’ve left big holes 
and they need to do their work, and they’ve yet cut 18 per cent 
of the budget. Unbelievable. Unbelievable. And they’ve cut 
funding for green energy appliances where they could have 
used that as an incentive, that money they saved there, put 
incentives for buildings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have no credible plan to reduce greenhouse 
gases so indeed this is a serious, serious issue that we’re 
debating. And as I said, our position has been clear, has been 
clear. It has been for some time now. This is a federal project 
that needs to go forward. It’s in Saskatchewan’s interest that it 
does goes forward. It’s in the national interest that it goes 
forward. And the National Energy Board has done its work and 
so Trudeau needs to step up, and he needs to step up quickly 
and with real leadership and make sure the work gets done. 
 
So we will have the debate on this bill. It’s important that 
there’s no unintended consequences. We are concerned of 
course that we want to make sure that Saskatchewan jobs are 
protected, that we can get those good jobs continuing at Evraz. 
That’s so important as they are responsible, I understand, for 
supplying some 75 per cent of the pipe for this project. So with 
that . . . I don’t want to go on long just because we want to 
make sure we’re clear on that, but I would adjourn debate now 
on Bill 126, An Act respecting Energy Exports. Thank you so 
much. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Centre has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 126, The Energy Export Act. 
Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 124 
 
[The Assembly resumed debate on the proposed motion by the 
Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 124 — The Environmental 
Management and Protection (Environmental Handling 
Charges) Amendment Act, 2018 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour today 
to rise to enter into adjourned debates on Bill No. 124, The 
Environmental Management and Protection (Environmental 
Handling Charges) Amendment Act. 
 
So the basic summary of what’s being proposed as an 
amendment in this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, is that the bill 
increases the fees for environmental handling charges on all 
beverage containers by 2 cents per container. And this bill 
makes the fee change retroactive to April 1st of this year, April 
1st, 2018, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we do have a few things to say about these changes, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’ll look at them in a little bit more detail as 
well. So in the environmental protection Act of 2010, in section 
40(2), it laid out what the environmental handling charges were 
to be remitted to the minister and it said, with respect to a 
designated container that is a metal can, it was 5 cents. That’s 
now going to be 7 cents. With respect to a designated container 
that is a plastic bottle, it was 6 cents. It’s going to be 8 cents. 
With respect to a designated container that is a non-refillable 
glass bottle, that was 7 and will be 9 cents. With respect to a 
designated container that is a multi-material, shelf-stable 
container, it was 3 cents and it will be 5 cents. And with respect 
to a designated container that is a paper-based polycoat 
gable-top container, it was 3 per cent and it will be 5 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I want to highlight the fact that, if folks haven’t had a chance 
to look at the bill, that we’re not talking about the deposit here, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re not talking about the money that goes back 
into the pockets of the dutiful consumer who’s concerned about 
recycling — which we hope everyone is — that will go back 
and return their bottles to get the deposit back. 
 
What we’re talking about here is the environmental handling 
charge, which is a fee that is charged to the consumer for 
purchasing that container, that is used in the handling of that 
container as the recycling process continues. So this is not 
money that is going back into people’s pockets. And I think it’s 
an important distinction to make when we’re talking about fees 
that are associated with beverage containers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this increase falls on top of increased deposits that came out 
last year. So in the deposits that we saw last year, the argument 
was made, well it’s not an increase if you return your bottles. 
But this, like I have said, is not refundable. And it also is . . . 
There’s also added costs already onto families and consumers 
as the PST went up. So for example, if I was to go to a 
convenience store or gas station and purchase a container of a 
juice from that location, the increase on PST went from 5 per 
cent up to 6 per cent as well. 
 
So when we’re talking about these containers and all the 
different ways that we’ve seen the cost of that container add up 
for consumers, it’s concerning, Mr. Speaker, when you look at 
how all of these pieces start to fit together and what the overall 
burden is that ends up on consumers’ laps. 
 
The other concern that we have, Mr. Speaker, is in relation to 
what happens to this environmental handling charge and where 
this money goes. And I understand that half of it is going to be 
kept by the government. It’s going to go into the government 
coffers. So half of this increase is going to go toward the 
government which adds up to quite a large commission that the 
government is making in this endeavour. 
 
[15:30] 
 
I do want to say that there were some concerns that, you know, 
we have this growing debt in our province and we’ve seen our 
debt payments increasing. Our Finance critic has talked about 
the debt payments increasing and how we have the highest net 
debt per capita that Saskatchewan has ever seen right now. And 
the comment was made, and I tend to agree, the comment was 
made that this feels like a bottle drive to save the province’s 



4138 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2018 

debt, Mr. Speaker. And unfortunately there’s so much debt, 
there’s so much debt to deal with so I’m afraid it won’t make 
the dent that the ministers are expecting, but it feels like a bottle 
drive to save us from the debt. And that’s concerning when we 
get to the point where we have to use our beverage containers. 
 
There’s a few things that I want to raise as we talk about this, 
Mr. Speaker, a couple of articles that existed in the Regina 
Leader-Post. This one was published on March 26th, 2018 and 
the headline is “Saskatchewan government fee increases ‘a 
backdoor way of raising taxes’: NDP.” It goes on to say: 
 

The government’s hike in fees announced Friday presents 
another burden for families . . . [I’m quoting the article] 
MLA Cathy Sproule said Monday . . . [after] question 
period. 
 
The government plans to add 18 million to its coffers in 
2018-2019 by increasing fees on various items. 
 
This includes $10.2 million from . . . the deposit on 
recyclable beverage containers by two cents each. 

 
And the MLA from Nutana pointed out juice boxes, juice boxes 
are the thing that we’re increasing fees on, we’re increasing 
taxes on, Mr. Speaker. It just points to the fact that we have a 
government that’s put PST on children’s diapers and clothing 
and now we see an additional fee on items that many, many 
families purchase on a regular basis. 
 
According to the Finance minister these fee increases are due to 
the cost of running the programs. But how about the fact that 
the government is going to keep half of this money in its 
coffers. So I don’t know if there’s the direct tie for cost of 
programs to the incremental charge here, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s certainly a question for my colleagues who will be taking 
this to committee, as well as curious as to following this money 
a little bit and seeing what’s going to be happening with it. 
 
And so just so you know I didn’t come up with the clever 
phrase of the bottle drive, I’ve got the article as well. I would 
like to have taken credit for it, Mr. Speaker, but I’ve got the 
article here from March 23rd, 2018, in the Regina Leader-Post 
and the title of this one is “Bottle drive: Province adding $10.2 
million in revenue by hiking deposit on beverage containers.” 
So in fact there’s an article referring to the fact that this is a 
bottle drive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when you look at the fact that last year’s budget increased 
taxes by nearly a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker, we’re talking 
about taxes on everyday families, everyday families. They’re 
going to be increasingly hurt by these charges. We need to be 
doing some serious investigating into what’s happening with 
the money in this province, Mr. Speaker. After 10 years of 
record revenue, we have the highest net debt per capita that 
we’ve ever seen in Saskatchewan. For a government that’s 
supposed to be considered good fiscal managers, I sure think 
that maybe they should start taking advice from members on 
this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. And with that, I will move 
to adjourn debate on Bill 124. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Fairview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 124, the environmental 

management and protection amendment Act, 2018. Pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 125 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 125 — The 
Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise into the debate today on Bill No. 125, an Act 
respecting the Saskatchewan value-added agricultural incentive.  
 
And so this is an interesting one we have before us. It’s one that 
the member from Meadow Lake brought forward. And of 
course we’ll have a lot of questions in committee on this. But it 
is an odd one because some of his comments were kind of 
sentimental. On one hand he’s looking forward to how 
Saskatchewan’s an economic powerhouse within Canada —we 
have 40 per cent of the arable farm land — and then, you know, 
sentimentally looking to the role of farmers. 
 
But I do have to think about the strong comments . . . my 
colleague from Athabasca talked about the family farm and how 
this will impact them and the sustainability of the family farm, 
and how really, how many jobs will this incentive really create. 
 
He talked about this bill creates a 15 per cent non-refundable 
tax credit for value-added agricultural facilities on a new capital 
investment and that companies will be required to apply to the 
government for a Saskatchewan value-added agricultural 
incentive certificate. And in order to be eligible for the 
certificate, an applicant must invest at least $10 million in new 
capital and submit to inspections from government officials to 
ensure that all the rules are being followed. And redemption of 
the benefits is limited to 20 per cent, year one; 30 per cent, year 
two; 50 per cent, year three. And there’s a maximum 
carry-forward of 10 years on any remaining credit. 
 
So it’d be interesting to know the size of farms or agribusiness 
that will be able to qualify for this. I mean it sort of reminds me 
of when we were debating a small-business tax credit earlier, or 
last year, and of course we found out a very small number of 
businesses could actually qualify. And the folks over there 
wrapped themselves up in the small-business flag, but really it 
was the big business that were reaping the benefits. And so with 
this, who will actually be getting the benefit? How many jobs 
will be created from this? Where did they come . . . Where did 
this idea originally come from? These are the kind of questions 
we’ll have in the House. 
 
You know, we get worried about this government when they do 
come up with some ideas like this, and was it from somebody in 
the airport where . . . gave them, pitched them on an idea? How 
many corporations will actually be able to qualify? And will 
they actually, if they are able to qualify on such a size of a 



May 1, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4139 

project, to $10 million . . . at least $10 million in new capital, do 
they really need this? So on one hand, you’re saying, the 
government’s saying, well we’re an economic powerhouse; 
we’re feeding the world. But at that time, and they’re saying, 
but we really need support. We really need support. 
 
So it’s interesting when we do get into committee to find out, so 
what’s the real story here? Who was the Minister of the 
Economy talking with, you know? And we watch daily in the 
House, spin the numbers in terms of job creation and what’s 
really happening. Unfortunately over an economy that they 
have decided that that minister has been responsible for some 
time now and how it’s just not doing as strong. It’s not as robust 
as it should be. And here one hand needs to be, you know, they 
say we should all be thinking happy thoughts and be positive. 
Turn on the positive. And that’s all we need to do except for 
those folks who can afford $10 million in capital investment. 
They do need the support. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, when I look . . . And I just think 
about my colleague’s comments earlier about organizing a 
bottle drive to help deal with the debt here. How many bottle 
drives are we going to have to have? You know, how many 
times are the families, ordinary families going to be nickelled 
and dimed to death? And really it is nickelled and dimed, you 
know, because on one hand all these things are just adding up, 
adding up. When you start to think about a container of juice 
bought at the convenience stores now being hit three times in 
the last 12 months in terms of an increase. And what’s the 
bottom line? What’s this government getting out of that? 
 
We know we have a good recycling record. We know that 
people need support in making sure that they can afford this. 
But if this is all, if this is all to support the debt and the kind of 
decisions these folks have made, and the economic ideas that 
these folks have come forward with. And I think this is the 
same minister, this is the same minister who had the Enterprise 
Saskatchewan of which we just repealed. I don’t know if that 
bill’s actually been repealed yet . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
It’s gone. So we can’t really talk about that in the past. 
Enterprise Saskatchewan which was, as one writer said, it was 
going to be the greatest thing or that the biggest flop in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Guess what it was? 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Guess what it was? Guess what it was? So 
forgive us if we’re a little cynical over here when this minister 
comes up with a bright idea but has nothing really to back it. 
Where did he get that idea? How many people are going to . . . 
What are the details? What are the details? The only details he 
can provide in his speech is that we have 40 per cent of arable 
farm land in Saskatchewan. Well that’s news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to focus on what really matters to people 
in Saskatchewan. And when we have the minister having a 
shiny object and maybe this is what it was on budget day, just 
one little shiny object that the minister was trying to distract us 
from what was really happening, what was really happening. 
The effect of these two budgets together . . . Actually well we 
can say since the last election when we’ve seen the kind of 
things that this government has come forward with in terms of 
their economic management, people do have the right to be a 

little worried about what the future holds for them, what the 
future of this province might be. 
 
Here it seems to be the gift of the day from the Sask Party to 
former MLAs — luggage. Everybody’s getting a matching set 
of luggage. They’re getting jobs in Alberta. We know two of 
them that have landed jobs in Alberta, and one in BC. And what 
did they get? What did they get? Luggage. What about the ones 
who want to go to Ottawa? What will they be getting? 
Everybody wants out of here on that side, you know, and I can 
just see they’re, probably got decals on the front of, you know, 
where they’ve been, and they’re leaving hints for the new 
Premier about the luggage they’d like to have, the luggage 
they’d like to have, whether it’s Samsonite, or Swiss, you 
know. What is the way, you know? And Samsonite is more 
fashionable I understand in Ottawa. Not quite so cool as in BC 
where it is the Swiss type of luggage that is more cool, I guess, 
more cool. I think that’s what you’ve got to be thinking about. 
So you know, five sets of luggage can be quite a charge . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . You know, I know. 
 
But there’s only been one of them who stayed back here, and I 
don’t think he got luggage. He got baggage. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Lots of baggage. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Lots of baggage there. So we don’t want to talk 
about that. That’s, you know . . . But I digress, Mr. Speaker, and 
I’ll get right back to the task at hand, and it’s about 125. I 
apologize for talking about luggage and baggage. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that this bill . . . We will 
have lots of questions in committee . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . I think it’s not a single inch of pipeline, but we’re seeing 
lots baggage, a lot of luggage around that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I digress. I digress. There will be lots to talk 
about on this piece of budget bill that’s before us, Bill 125, The 
Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act. Where 
did it come from? Hopefully it’ll work. We all want to make 
sure this province achieves great things, and especially with our 
heritage. 
 
And I wear this pin with pride, this wheat sheaf that actually 
ironically those folks over there wanted to get rid of, this wheat 
sheaf pin. I wear it with pride every day because that is our 
tradition here in Saskatchewan. Agriculture is one of the, one of 
the many activities that have driven this province to the place it 
is today. 
 
And I want to say that we’ll be asking a lot of questions about 
this of the Minister of Economy. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
going to move adjournment of Bill 125, The Saskatchewan 
Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act. Thank you very much. 
 
[15:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Centre has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 125, The Saskatchewan 
Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act. Pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



4140 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2018 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 81 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 81 — The 
Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to rise 
again today and enter into adjourned debates on Bill No. 81, 
The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act of 2017. 
And we’ll take some time to go through what some of the 
changes are that are being proposed in this bill, Mr. Speaker. 
And we’ll go through what some of the concerns are that we 
have on this side of the House that we want to make sure are 
being carefully thought through by the government as they put 
forward this legislation. 
 
So one of the things that I often find useful when going through 
adjourned debates on amendment Acts is to go through the 
explanatory notes which explain a little bit or provide some 
detail on what the changes are that are being proposed here. So 
I’ll provide some background on what some of those changes 
are here. 
 
So some of the changes that are being proposed are updating the 
definition of “dealer” to include a trailer dealer, defining 
“service vehicle,” updating the definition of “trailer” for 
registration purposes so that small farm trailers don’t require 
registration, whereas other trailers require registration. The 
exemption for registration is set out in regulations. It also 
defines “trailer dealer.” There is a change to indicate how an 
administrator may use the facial recognition software, sets out 
restrictions on the use of facial recognition software, and allows 
the administrator to provide specific information obtained 
through its facial recognition technology to law enforcement 
when the administrator suspects identity theft or identity fraud. 
It: 
 

Adds a requirement that permits issued in . . . [other 
jurisdictions] for the purpose of moving a vehicle must be 
issued by the jurisdiction of the vehicle’s origin for a 
registration exemption to apply in this jurisdiction. 
 
[It] allows for prescribed exceptions to the requirement 
that certificates of registration be used only in respect of 
the vehicle to which the registration was issued. 
 
Protects law enforcement officers from liability for damage 
to an individual’s electronic device when it is used to 
display a driver’s licence, vehicle registration or auto 
insurance credentials. 
 

It defines a class B vehicle and requires that class B vehicles, 
seating capacity of 10 or fewer persons, need to file proof of 
insurance with the administrator when registering a vehicle. 
 

Updates cross-reference as a result of . . . [the] Highway 
Traffic Board’s authority. 

Removes the board’s ability to issue registration permits.  
 
Removes reference to the board’s ability to set registration 
fees as this authority now rests solely with the 
administrator. 

 
And I won’t read what all the explanations are, Mr. Speaker, 
but there are a number of other changes that I want to highlight 
and that I want to go through as well. The explanatory notes for 
this particular bill are, I think here, about 43 pages long. So for 
the sake of the folks at home, I won’t provide all of the 
explanation of what the changes are, but I’ll provide a bit of a 
summary of what I think some of the key pieces are here that 
folks should be paying attention to. 
 
So when we talk about the blood alcohol content of drivers and 
what the repercussions are, I think that there was a good 
summary on this piece done by my colleague from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. So I’ll just provide a bit of a recap of what some of 
the changes are that have been proposed here with regards to 
the blood alcohol content. 
 
So the main change here, Mr. Speaker, is that a driver with a 
blood alcohol content level of .04 or higher who’s transporting 
children who are under the age of 16 will face longer licence 
suspension and vehicle seizures that are associated with repeat 
offenders. So the idea here is that a higher bar is being set for 
folks who are driving with children under 16 in their vehicles. 
 
So my colleague from Saskatoon Riversdale talks about what 
this means, and I think it’s important, particularly if folks have 
children or find themselves transporting children. You know, I 
am an auntie as well, so I find myself transporting children 
probably more often than I thought I would in my duties as an 
aunt. And so I think it’s important for all of us to know what 
these are and that we have a big public education piece around 
this as well. 
 
So my colleague from Saskatoon Riversdale said: 
 

. . . drivers with a blood alcohol content between .04 and 

.08 or who fail a field sobriety test will face a seven-day 
administrative driving suspension if they have a child 
under the age of 16 in the car with them. So instead of 
getting a three-day licence suspension on the first offence, 
that would be a seven-day suspension. Instead of a 21-day 
suspension on a second offence, it’ll change to 30 days. 
And for a third offence, it increases from 90 to 120 days. 
So that’s the licence suspension part. 
 
The length of time a vehicle will be seized is also 
increasing, Mr. Speaker. Both new and experienced drivers 
will have their vehicles seized if they have a child under 
16, Mr. Speaker, for seven days on the first offence, up 
from three days. It increases from seven to 30 days on a 
second offence. On a third offence it increases from 60 
days, up from seven days for new drivers, or 14 days for 
experienced drivers, Mr. Speaker. 

 
So I think she clearly identifies what the changes are here and 
how people who are going to be driving children under 16 are 
held to a higher standard, are held to a higher bar with this bill, 
Mr. Speaker. 



May 1, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4141 

Some other changes that have taken place, the looking-back 
period is extended from 5 years to 10 years, allowing for 
tougher penalties for repeat offenders. So meaning if someone 
had an incident eight years ago in their record, that will be 
considered a repeat offence, Mr. Speaker, where it wouldn’t 
have been previously. So again, introducing harsher penalties 
here. 
 
Law enforcement can offer an indefinite administration 
suspension, making roadside consequences for those charged 
with impaired driving under the Criminal Code consistent with 
those charged with exceeding .08 blood alcohol content or 
refusing to comply with a demand for a test. 
 
Slowing to 60 kilometres per hour is now required when 
snowplows are stopped on the side of the road and when 
passing other vehicles that are providing assistance if prescribed 
lights are in operation. So if you see the flashing lights, slow 
down to 60 and make sure . . . And of course this is for 
everyone’s safety, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll want to see what 
additional public awareness campaigns have been put out on 
some of these pieces. 
 
I know there’s still questions about blood alcohol content and 
the changes that were made there. And we’re looking at about a 
year and a half ago now, Mr. Speaker, that those changes were 
made. So I think public awareness is key in these pieces 
because if we’re going to change the culture, and I think what 
we’re arguing here is that a cultural shift needs to take place 
around drinking and driving in Saskatchewan, if we’re going to 
change the culture so that it’s not expected that folks will still 
drive after drinking, public awareness campaigns are a key 
piece of doing that to be able to change and almost stigmatize 
folks who have a couple of drinks and then think it’s okay to get 
behind the wheel. 
 
I know I have colleagues on this side of the House who are 
good allies in this and will check around and ask if you’ve had a 
drink or two — are you okay, you know, should you be getting 
another ride? — or offering rides to people. And I think that 
that’s the culture that we need to be able to foster in order to see 
meaningful change in this area. And we all know someone 
who’s been impacted by drinking and driving and some of the 
deaths that have taken place. It’s an important piece for us here, 
so we have to make sure that we get it right. So I think public 
awareness is going to be a key piece of this campaign as well. 
 
There’s also a concern that we have about the fact that this bill, 
in the many different things that it does, it repeals the 
requirements for operation authority certificates. So this means 
that those who are operating a vehicle on the highway for the 
purpose of transporting passengers no longer need an operating 
authority certificate. We’re going to be having a lot of questions 
for the minister on this as it removes a lot of transparency and 
accountability. 
 
I know that my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana spent a great 
deal of time talking about this in her second reading. I 
remember it well and was here for it. And some of the concerns 
that this deregulation poses for us, and she said . . . She’s 
talking about the justification for this, and she says on 
November 8th: 
 

Now that sounds like pretty important stuff, Mr. Speaker, 
when you think about it. If someone’s going to be 
operating a vehicle, carrying passengers for hire, you kind 
of think that maybe routes, insurance, rates, background 
checks are kind of important things when the members of 
the public are getting into these vehicles, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what he tells us [is that], and this is something that 
came out very clearly in June of this year, “Over time the 
Highway Traffic Board has been issuing them in a much 
more general way, and they have almost evolved into a 
rubber stamp.” [She’s referring to the minister here, of 
course, Mr. Speaker.] So rather than making sure the 
Highway Traffic Board takes these processes seriously, 
what does he do? Well . . . he says, Mr. Speaker: “Thus it 
makes sense to deregulate this process.” 

 
So we’re concerned about the process of deregulation. We’re 
talking about some important details that were previously 
required in order to get the operating authority certificate. 
Routes, what route are you taking to take your passengers? 
Insurance, what the rates are going to be, and background 
checks of drivers, Mr. Speaker. So when we’re talking about 
deregulating this system, we’re discussing the idea that when 
transporting members of the public for hire, these pieces are no 
longer required. 
 
So when you think about public getting into these vehicles and 
the possibilities for deregulation, this is of serious concern to 
us, and particularly in light of the fact that what we’re really 
talking about here, Mr. Speaker, is drivers who are set up to 
replace, on the major routes, the service that STC was providing 
to the good people of this province. We’re talking about what 
was an essential service in this province being replaced by 
drivers who, you know . . . And I applaud them for taking 
advantage of an economic opportunity but, in that case, 
government has a responsibility to regulate that system to make 
sure that the public are safe and to make sure that when they’re 
getting into that vehicle, they know that a background check has 
been done on that driver. They know that it’s a safe situation for 
them. 
 
And we know that there were a number of pieces that STC 
provided here in terms of safety and peace of mind for folks. 
And there’s actually a . . . I was going to bring up an article. 
Just indulge me for a minute here if I can find it here, Mr. 
Speaker. So this is the article here in the Regina Leader-Post, 
and it’s on June 7th, 2017: “Highway traffic board hears 
objections of two STC-replacement applications.” So these are 
some of the concerns that are raised here. Safety is a concern: 
 

. . . as was cost of service and accommodation for 
vulnerable passengers, including cancer patients and 
people with disabilities. 
 
STC buses . . . [used to be] equipped with cameras and the 
Zonar safety system . . . which allowed drivers to easily 
connect with ground transportation and police, track the 
speed of the bus, the hours the driver spent behind the 
wheel, and maintenance issues. 
 
STC drivers were also trained to de-escalate dangerous 
situations. STC had “exemplary” safety standards, and new 



4142 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2018 

companies should have the same standard . . . 
 
[16:00] 
 
So these are some of the concerns that have been raised and a 
number of different articles that have existed here. The public 
has shown quite a bit of interest in this file. We need to make 
sure that we get it right. And ideally we’d love to see the 
government bring in a province-wide bus system that would 
service the province, Mr. Speaker, as we do see it as an 
essential service, and there have been a number of concerns 
with that. 
 
If the government won’t bring that in, I would encourage them 
to have a look at the regulation and to make sure that the people 
of this province are in good hands, the public is in good hands 
when they’re travelling as passengers on highways across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So those are my thoughts on this particular bill, Mr. Speaker. I 
know my colleagues will have a lot more to share and will have 
more questions in committee. But with that, I will move that we 
adjourn debate on Bill 81. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Fairview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 81, The Traffic Safety 
(Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017. Pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 83 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 83 — The 
Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure this 
evening to rise and enter into debate on Bill No. 83, The 
Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course any time that we are talking about the 
management and protection of our natural resources, 
particularly in a province as both reliant and defined by our 
natural resources and our natural spaces, I think this is 
something that certainly requires our attention, our diligence. 
And I hope to provide some of that today, as have my 
colleagues when they’ve entered into second reading debates. 
 
Just a quick overview of this bill, some points that I’d like to 
make. It allows the minister to appoint new members to the 
Saskatchewan Environmental Code advisory committee instead 
of having them, as currently the case, appointed by an order in 
council. I think there’s a move to go from a three-person board 
to add two more, making it a five-person board, I believe, with 
representation from SUMA. And perhaps I am mixing my bills 
up, Mr. Speaker, but it does provide changes for the 
Environmental Code advisory committee, changes them from 

being appointed by Lieutenant Governor in Council to an order 
in council, Mr. Speaker. It provides more power to the minister. 
And anytime that that happens, Mr. Speaker, we worry about a 
decreasing accountability, so I think that that’s something that 
we will have additional questions on when this bill does go to 
committee. 
 
There’s some reference to the definition of human health when 
referencing adverse impacts from water supplied by 
waterworks, Mr. Speaker. I guess that’s been neglected to this 
point, to be included as in the list of adverse effects from water. 
I guess there are others, but the adverse effects to human health 
certainly needs to be up there, and it is important that we see 
this oversight and these protections in legislation. 
 
There are very few things in life that are more fundamental than 
access to clean drinking water, and that certainly is something 
that most people in this province enjoy. But I can’t let that go 
by, Mr. Speaker, without making note of something that we do 
allow to exist in this province, across the country certainly is 
under federal regulation, but something that we do allow to 
exist. 
 
So just as a bit of contrast, the level of water security and 
assurance that those who live off-reserve in this province 
reasonably have, and ought to have security and confidence in 
their drinking system. We have a situation on-reserve in this 
province where 90 per cent of Saskatchewan First Nations have 
faced bad drinking water, that they . . . A CBC [Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation] analysis — I’m reading now from 
2015, but I’m afraid that things haven’t changed that much — is 
the revelation that 65 of the province’s 70 First Nations have 
had at least one drinking water advisory since 2004. That’s 93 
per cent and that number is well above the national average of 
just over 60 per cent. 
 
So I enter that into the record because although it’s not strictly 
under provincial jurisdiction, it is a shocking and I think 
indefensible contrast that exists in our province today, where on 
one hand we are and ought to be looking at increased regulation 
and oversight with regard to drinking water for off-reserve 
communities, provincially regulated communities, and yet we 
allow this to exist in our province at a rate of 90 per cent of 
communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know that not always . . . When there are matters that are 
technically under federal jurisdiction, it’s not that we can’t raise 
our voice and insist on better from our federal government, and 
I think this ought to be reasonably one of those places. If there 
is an understanding that people in Saskatchewan deserve access 
to clean drinking water, surely that must apply to all residents 
of this province. 
 
So again outside the purview of this particular Act, but certainly 
should be the business of this Assembly when we are talking 
about governing for the people of Saskatchewan regardless of 
where they live. So I just wanted to make sure that I put that on 
the record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are some other provisions in this Act, provisions to deal 
with people trying to redeem out-of-province beverage 
containers. Of course Saskatchewan has a very robust recycling 
program, charging fees. Some of that is returned to Sarcan, 



May 1, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4143 

some of that is returned to provincial coffers, certainly an 
increased amount in this last budget that we saw. The 
bottle-drive budget has been not coined, but quoted by my 
colleague from Saskatoon. 
 
I guess that this is a problem, certainly something you’ve heard 
of people from jurisdictions where that levy isn’t collected, 
trying to come into Saskatchewan to collect money. And so I 
guess that there are some provisions to deal with that and 
including penalties outlined, Mr. Speaker, which does seem 
rather reasonable. 
 
There’s a new authority to the minister that’s granted to operate 
a product stewardship program, which could be used to update 
programs or take over when a stewardship program isn’t 
meeting at schools. So again that’s increased authority for the 
minister and is something that bears further scrutiny. 
 
This bill also allows inspection powers for environment officers 
to conduct inspections and audits. Certainly I think this appears 
at least on surface to be a positive move. Any time that you 
have regulations, that’s only part of the piece if you can’t 
enforce them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I think we’ll have some 
more questions about that, but certainly on surface seems to be 
reasonable and perhaps a strengthening of this legislation. 
 
Of course we’re seeing this legislation this year. It was part . . . 
This legislation played a big role in 2014 when the now 
Premier, then Environment minister announced a new 
environmental code, and part of that announcement included 
changes to this Act and also The Forest Resources Management 
Act. I note that the minister, the now minister noted in his 
second reading comments that, and I quote, “The amended 
legislation is consistent with other provincial resource 
management legislation, and is also in line with Saskatchewan’s 
results-based approach to environmental regulation.” 
 
So when that announcement was made that was a cornerstone 
of that announcement, this results-based approach to 
environmental regulation. I’m looking for the quote here. This 
is something that at that time was touted as being a 
made-in-Saskatchewan solution, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was 
innovative, forward looking and good for our environment and 
our province. So it was a big announcement. 
 
I believe there was quite a robust and lengthy consultation 
period before this code was announced. There was an online 
survey and I believe there were interviews with over 200 
stakeholders or the like. And it was looking at a different way 
of regulation or of conducting regulation. I think the term used 
was targeting high-risk projects and perhaps loosening of 
regulations on other projects. 
 
At that time, when it was announced in 2014, it was noted that 
one significant advantage of the code is that it may be updated 
without the need for new regulations certainly which caused 
some concern around oversight. But the research advisor with 
the Saskatchewan Environmental Society and member of the 
code development committee, Ann Coxworth, noted: 
 

The sections of the environmental code announced today 
will provide an opportunity to test the viability of this 
approach to regulation . . . [So hopeful but it’s a test.] It’s 

my hope that the code will be an effective tool for 
environmental protection, provided the necessary 
commitment and goodwill is shown on all sides. 

 
Mr. Speaker, so that certainly is a positive but rather tentative 
statement about this type of results-based approach to 
regulation. I think that in between the lines in that comment are 
some concerns noting that it’s a test. Let’s see if this works. 
And a hope, a hope that there would be commitment and 
goodwill on all sides, which was something that she was noting 
needed to be present in order for this code to be effective and 
fulfill its stated goals. In some ways dual goals, both on the 
environmental protection side, but also very heavy in that 
announcement and in this announcement as well, the balance 
with keeping pace with growth. 
 
So there’s a bit of a tension there between environmental 
protection and laxening permits to keep pace with growth. And 
certainly that’s a very delicate balance — an understandable 
balance — but one it’s very important that we get right, that we 
don’t tip too far in one direction or the other. 
 
As has been noted by the minister, by many speakers to this 
bill, our very . . . Of course our lives, our health depends on the 
water and the air and so much of our economic activity in this 
province relies on the land. And so it is very incumbent upon all 
members of this Assembly to ensure that we are awake at the 
switch and paying attention to this legislation, ensuring that 
we’ve got that balance right, ensuring that we are providing 
adequate oversight again to our air, our water, and our land. 
 
We not only have to be doing the right thing, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we also have to be perceived and be trusted as doing 
the right thing by members of the public. When we’re . . . You 
know, of course there’s a big debate about transportation of 
natural resources, and it’s really important that we show those 
who have concerns, a confidence in the system, that there is 
sufficient oversight, that there is sufficient regulation, that there 
is, when problems do happen, that they will be quickly rectified. 
 
And I think of the Husky oil spill that I don’t think anyone in 
this Assembly or in this province will soon forget, and that was 
a spill that had put the drinking water of some, I believe it was 
70,000 citizens of this province in jeopardy in the middle of the 
summer. 
 
[16:15] 
 
And I’m not sure that that process and both the spill and the 
subsequent transparency of information and events is something 
that has instilled confidence, Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s 
unfortunate because there’s an opportunity there when, you 
know, to do the best that you can to make sure that nothing goes 
wrong. But there’s also a need that when something does go 
wrong, that leadership is shown, that the people of the province 
have confidence that we are taking this seriously, that we are 
protecting waterways, that we are protecting the land. And 
when that’s lacking, Mr. Speaker, we, people act in fear. And 
I’m not sure that that’s the best situation for anyone in this 
province, again especially when we’re dealing with a 
resource-based economy like ours. 
 
So all that to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it’s very important 



4144 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2018 

that we get this right and that we pay close attention to this 
legislation and any changes that are made to it. 
 
Just wanted to take a chance to get this book a little closer to 
my eyes, and look at some of the comments of the minister on 
second reading, again talking about the new results-based 
approach to environmental protection and resource management 
that emphasizes outcomes and not processes. You know, 
processes for processes’ sake of course, I think we can all agree, 
are redundant and perhaps cumbersome. Processes that do 
fulfill their intended purpose maybe shouldn’t always be done 
away with. So I hope that we are keeping a keen eye on that. 
 

The code reduces government red tape by replacing [the] 
. . . permits with notifications and allows timely 
authorization of various activities such as water and 
sewage main construction, hydrostatic testing, and spill 
reporting. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I think any time that we talk about spill 
reporting, about water, it reasonably perks up the interest of 
people in this province and they want to be assured that we are 
getting this balance right. 
 
I believe, if memory serves, there’s also an amendment here 
that I think is rather curious, and I know that the critic and my 
colleagues will have further comments about this: 
 

A further amendment will include provision for a person to 
request that information of a commercial, financial, 
scientific, or technical nature that may reveal proprietary 
business, competitive, or trade-secret information to be 
kept confidential beyond the original five-year time period. 
Every five years a person may reapply to have that 
information kept confidential. This will be done through 
the original application process. 

 
So I’d be very curious to know, first of all, what the reason is 
for making that in a status quo way, why that information is 
seen as being beneficial to the public to have that information, 
and why this amendment would keep that information from the 
public. And again, it’s important that we get that balance right. I 
know that there have been concerns about release of reports 
following the Husky oil spill. There have been a number of 
high-profile concerns about environmental regulations in this 
province. And again, I hope that folks are paying attention out 
there and insisting that the government get this bill right. I 
know that members on this side will be, as will the critic in 
committee. 
 
That said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that this is an important 
bill and requires further oversight, but I think I have come to the 
end of my comments on Bill No. 83, and I do move to adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 83, The Environmental 
Management and Protection Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 89 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Eyre that Bill No. 89 — The School 
Choice Protection Act/Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter in, very briefly here today, on Bill No. 89, The 
School Choice Protection Act. And certainly we look forward to 
discussions in committee as well. And we’ve had very 
important discussions with school boards all across the 
province. And I want to thank the Catholic school board, 
certainly for their leadership and for their voice. 
 
We recognize that this decision that was brought down really 
had the potential of really upsetting our education system and, 
most importantly, the school life of children and families all 
across our province. The relationship that a child, that a student 
builds with a school community, with educators, with education 
workers, with a school itself, is something that really should 
never be jeopardized. It needs to be leveraged for the greater 
good of that student at every opportunity. 
 
And the potential of having students being pulled from one 
division and into another because of this decision was 
something that is a concern to me and certainly we, right from 
the get-go, in the end along with government as well, have 
supported the appeal of the Catholic school boards on this front. 
I think that appeal is very important. Certainly boards need time 
and clarity on this front. And certainly we’re going to stand as a 
constructive ally with students and with our school boards. 
 
I do want to recognize just the incredible education that 
students receive in all of our publicly funded school divisions 
across the province. Of course that’s our public divisions, that’s 
our Catholic divisions, Mr. Speaker. And speaking to, you 
know, Catholic education itself or Catholic boards across the 
province, it’s important to note that they have an incredible 
history in this province of providing high-quality education and 
helping build our province. They also have a constitutional . . . 
or the students have a constitutional right, as parents have a 
constitutional right to Catholic education, Catholic school 
boards, within the province, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve witnessed 
first-hand, of course. I’m a teacher before coming into this 
Chamber and I have continued to build and maintain a 
relationship with the education sector in every corner of our 
province and with our school boards, public and Catholic, and 
I’ve witnessed just incredible work of our Catholic educators 
and boards across our province. 
 
It’s frustrating to me that this issue didn’t get the leadership it 
needed from the Sask Party government over the last number of 
years. It’s too bad that we had a decision that was handed down 
with such, you know, potential impacts for our school system. 
It’s the kind of issue, Mr. Speaker, that would have required 
some hard work on behalf of government, bringing together 
boards and working together on that front. 
 
But it’s a reminder, I hope, I hope to government opposite but 



May 1, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4145 

to all of us, that it’s sometimes these projects that aren’t real 
flashy but very important that require hard work and attention 
and they need to stay on the top of the desk of a premier, top of 
the desk of an Education minister. But as we move forward, 
we’ll be engaged as allies on this front. We’ll be standing 
strong to make sure that students have peace of mind in those 
Catholic schools across our province. Certainly the appeals 
should provide that too, while it goes through various courts, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s important for students across Saskatchewan 
and for families and parents to have that peace of mind and that 
certainty, and that the relationship that a family and a student 
builds with a school will not be compromised, Mr. Speaker. 
And certainly I’ll be standing as an ally on that front. 
 
We’ll look forward to further discussion within this legislature 
on this front within the committee, and we’ll continue to meet 
with school boards across Saskatchewan. And I guess what I 
would say: this is an important matter that needs to be dealt 
with, but what we need to be doing today for every last school 
across our province, for every last student across our province, 
for every last school division across our province, public and 
Catholic, is we need to make sure that that investment is there. 
 
We have a Sask Party government that has shortchanged the 
education of students today and into the future. They’ve 
shortchanged school boards, public and Catholic. They’ve 
compromised the education that our students deserve. They’ve 
eliminated needed supports and programs because of their 
underfunding, Mr. Speaker. They’ve eliminated programs that 
were essential to students — all students, but I think of students 
with intensive needs, Mr. Speaker, who have lost the kind of 
supports that they need. 
 
So this is an important file and we’ll work through the process 
with the courts and stand as a strong ally. But the action we 
need today and the action that we need from this government is 
for them to step up with the investment that’s needed for 
students today and for schools and school boards — all school 
boards across our province, public and Catholic — to make sure 
that the resources are there to prepare the next generation. 
 
Education is the foundation of our future, Mr. Speaker. And 
after years of underfunding and disrespect by the Sask Party to 
the education sector and to school boards and partners, Mr. 
Speaker, what we’ve seen is dramatic cuts that are devastating 
classrooms, Mr. Speaker. And when we look at students within 
our province, students that are in classrooms across the 
province, we have one chance to get it right. 
 
So we implore this government to of course take the ruling and 
this decision seriously and to support that appeal through the 
courts and to provide peace of mind and security to students, 
but most importantly do the thing that they have direct control 
over right now, which is to step up and to reverse the damaging 
cuts that they’ve imposed upon all school divisions across our 
province and work to make sure that we build the best 
education for every last student in our province. 
 
Ultimately education provides the ability for young people to 
live up to their full potential. In so doing we allow our province 
to live up to its full potential. And rest assured, to every last 
parent across Saskatchewan, every last student across 
Saskatchewan, every school division across Saskatchewan, the 

Saskatchewan New Democrats, the official opposition, will 
fight for students and work to make sure that their needs are 
met and to make sure that the damaging cuts of the Sask Party 
are reversed and that we put the investment where it counts, in 
classrooms across Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At 
this time I’ll adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 89, The School Choice 
Protection Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 111 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doke that Bill No. 111 — The 
Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to rise again this afternoon and this time to speak to 
Bill No. 111, The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Act, 2017. 
This bill was announced by the minister going all the way back 
to November of 2017 when he rose to enter introduction or 
second reading comments to this bill. 
 
It was noted at that time by the minister that the Act was first 
introduced in 1968 and established a tax-sharing system for 
municipal taxes on potash mines. Of course the intent was to 
share some of that revenue with the surrounding communities 
that supported that mine, in order to benefit those communities. 
And I’m sure that lots of good works have been created and 
maintained with this revenue sharing. 
 
1968 is a fair amount of time ago. I think that there was some 
small changes made in 2005, but the last substantive change to 
this Act came in 1978. So certainly that’s 40 years ago so it 
would seem reasonable that we’re looking at this. Of course the 
issue of municipal tax sharing has been much in the news of 
course out of last year’s budget. And I certainly understand why 
municipalities and communities would have . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well the member opposite would like to talk 
even further back, but I’m trying to bring the discussion to 
current day and talk about the concern around municipal 
revenue sharing that certainly got people’s attention during the 
last provincial budget. Some agreed-upon arrangements that I 
think municipalities thought were in place and were to be 
counted on, turned out weren’t so counted on. So I’m sure that 
the opportunity to have some oversight and provide some 
clarity, as is the stated intent of this bill, would be appreciated 
by those bodies. 
 
[16:30] 
 
It’s noted that this bill by the minister is intended to modernize 
the Act. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Act is in so much need of 



4146 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2018 

modernization, as one of the provisions is to update the term 
“mile,” to update it to use “kilometre.” So I don’t know if 
anyone in this Assembly . . . I’m old enough to remember the 
switchover from the old imperial system to metric and the 
commercials that used to be on TV with your Saturday morning 
cartoons, telling you that zero degrees was . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I didn’t think you were that old. 
 
Ms. Beck: — I’m even older than that . . . was the temperature 
at which water froze. So certainly if we’re having to make those 
changes, it has been a long time since we opened up this Act 
and gave it a good look. So certainly I am sure that it’s 
appreciated, and much has changed. We have metric now, and 
so much more has changed in the last 40 years in this province. 
So it certainly is reasonable to . . . Well I’m getting a bit of a 
history lesson from the member from Cannington, but I think 
I’ll stick to my notes here. There’s a lot of history in this 
province that we could debate, but I’d like to keep my 
comments more or less focused on the Bill No. 111. 
 
Some of the other pieces that are in addition to modernizing, it 
redefines the actual municipal mill rate. It sets a standard 
formula to be used for all municipalities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I’m sure that predictability and the upholding of agreements 
and definitions is very important to people of this province. I 
think of, as we’ve seen particularly, municipalities. And they 
rely on the agreements that they sign with the provincial 
government, so I hope that it does have the stated intent here in 
making . . . that the formula is clear in how the mill rate is to be 
calculated for potash tax sharing to avoid improper calculations 
in the future. 
 
So any time we can spread some clarity and reduce improper 
calculations, that would seem to be certainly a goal worth 
pursuing, as has been stated with this legislation, and is 
something. How exactly the measures in this Act are going to 
work towards those ends, I think is something that the critic will 
be asking in committee. 
 
There is also a new section that outlines a standard date to be 
set for when the board announces the mill rate for the next year, 
and that they will inform individual potash mines and the 
Potash Producers Association. That certainly seems to be a 
reasonable thing. If you think that the announcement of the mill 
rate is going to come around the time that you’re setting a 
budget, and it’s delayed and delayed, certainly something that 
anyone who’s sat on a school board, for example, in the 
province unfortunately has a lot of familiarity with . . . The 
transparency, the predictability is very important there. And I 
understand that that was asked for by a number of stakeholders, 
so it would seem to be a positive addition to this Act. 
 
A new section clarifies that tax tools are prohibited, but that tax 
incentives are not. Municipalities can continue to apply 
discounts to tax on potash mine assessments, so I guess that’s 
left in the purview of the individual municipality. If there are 
agreements that they want to enter into, I don’t know if there 
are any parameters on that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
There are some parameters on this agreement in that it doesn’t 
include the cities of Humboldt, Saskatoon, and Yorkton despite 
their proximity and involvement with the potash industry. So I 

would be curious, and I know the critic will be curious too, to 
know why those communities in particular were left out. 
 
And again I’m sure that the critic has and will continue to meet 
with the stakeholders and ensure that their voice is present here 
and that the proposed changes have rolled out the way that they 
would like to see them, and in a way that maybe updates this 
Act so much that we don’t need to open it up again for a while. 
Maybe it’ll be a little bit before another 30 years, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but make sure that we get it right and make sure it’s 
predictable and it is equitably applied across those communities 
that are impacted. Again I’m sure the critic will have even more 
questions. There may be more questions and comments from 
members on this side, but I think I’ve come to the end of mine 
and I will move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 111. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 112 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 112 — The 
Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis 
Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, to join in on the 
miscellaneous vehicle and driver stats cannabis legislation 
amendment Act, 2017. Easy for us to say. Just want to get in 
and share a few comments about where it’s coming in, and I 
realize that the federal legislation with cannabis is coming in. 
We know that, and the government is getting ready to respond 
to it. 
 
But before I get into it, I guess this bill is coming forward and 
it’s going to change . . . make some amendments and make 
some change. But it’s coming in because of the new federal . . . 
under the Criminal Code Act, so they’re coming in compliance 
that they have to adopt. And there’re certain ways that that 
comes in for the province, so the province is doing what it 
needs to do to make sure that the legislation, the rules that are 
required in the province to be done when you have federal laws 
coming in, and some of the changes they will . . . and they’re 
going to make some of the changes into certain Acts. I think it’s 
The Traffic Safety Act, another one that they will go into. 
 
Definition, you know, of “drug” will be in there, where I guess 
used to talk about alcohol; now you’re going to have drug. But 
having said that, I was doing just some thinking about it, and I 
know currently right now the law is if you’re impaired, under 
the influence of alcohol/drug . . . And I suspect there’s a way to 
do it. I’m no expert on it. And you know, if they’re suspecting 
you’re under the influences of drugs, then there was . . . And I 
was talking about enforcement having some special training. 
And there were officers, I remember hearing, have certain 



May 1, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4147 

training to detect, and they have certain ways of detecting if 
somebody’s impaired driving. Right now we have the 
Breathalyzer. And I know there has been a lot of talk about 
what way would you have to detect somebody who’s been 
under the influence of drugs. 
 
And I guess it’s not just, you know, cannabis. It’s whatever 
drug that’s out there that people might be under the influence of 
. . . they’re suspecting, you know. Maybe whatever the side 
effects the officer who’s trained to, you know, whether it’s a 
smell, whether it’s the look, whether they can tell. So there’s 
obviously a training that goes down and takes part in that. But I 
guess overall it’s to stop . . . 
 
And it is about, again at the end of the day, let’s be honest and 
say it’s about safety. We want Saskatchewan residents who are 
on our highways to be as safe as they can. And that means we 
utilize our law enforcement. We know that we ask citizens if 
they suspect somebody, you know, is under the influence of 
alcohol or drugs, to turn them in. There’s tips. There’s different 
numbers you can call, you know, report an impaired driving. So 
there’s different avenues that we try to utilize as a province to 
make the awareness how dangerous it is for people to not only 
be impaired, but also under the influence of drugs. And that is 
important. 
 
And the government’s changing their legislation. And they’re 
having that part that will come into play that will create the 
rules, I guess, and what ways that the law enforcement will 
carry out their everyday duty when it comes to dealing with 
cannabis when it becomes legal. And when it’s legal, there’s 
going to be . . . And we’ve talked about some of the bills. 
 
And I know I have, you know, had an opportunity on some of 
the other bills previous to this bill, talked about the concerns 
that are out there. And you know, the government took too long 
and they should’ve moved quickly on it and should’ve been 
doing work when they knew in 2015 this was something that 
was going to come forward. And that’s what the federal 
government, was one of their campaign, I believe . . . 
[inaudible] . . . So it’s coming through and we’re going to have 
to be dealing with it. 
 
But having said that, at the end of the day we’re going to be 
dealing with . . . I’m not sure how, once an officer suspects an 
individual of impaired driving when we’re talking with alcohol, 
they can do the Breathalyzer, blood . . . I understand that. And 
they go through that. Then you go through the court if you’re 
found guilty. And until you go through the court and you’re 
found guilty, right now, you know, they’ll impound your 
vehicle. There are many things that they will do. You might get 
a suspension until you go to court. With your driver’s, you can’t 
drive. So there’s all these things that are coming into play with 
alcohol, and law enforcement have these tools and the courts 
deal with it as they can. And there’s consequences for that. We 
try . . . because there’s been too many fatalities and too many 
people willing to take chances drinking and driving. 
 
So now you’re having, you know, moving forward on that, 
you’re going to have where you’re going to ask your police 
officers and the law enforcement to catch people that are using 
drugs once they’re legalized. And I know that’s . . . you know, 
you can’t have it in your possession. 

So let’s just say they do suspect. They pull somebody over and 
they find a bag of marijuana. Well in the legislation prior that I 
talked to, when you’re going to purchase marijuana for your 
own personal use, you’re allowed 30 grams. But when you buy 
that from the retail outlet that’s going to be selling it — and that 
they should be following the regulations that they need — 
you’re supposed to take that product and go straight home to 
your residence or to the place where you’re going to consume 
that, you know, well legal drug now, that they’ll say cannabis as 
it will be legal to do that. 
 
But again I go back to that you’re going to have situations, 
maybe somebody . . . If the officer suspects that maybe they can 
smell it, that suspects that you’re . . . I’m not sure, and it is 
going to be interesting to find out, how are they going to . . . 
what information or what tools are they going to have? 
 
And I think it’s going to be good for us as legislators to know 
and as MLAs to understand what it is and maybe, you know, do 
a little bit of, I guess, research on our own. And maybe some 
have, and that’s good. And maybe when we get into committee 
and asking the minister and officials, they’ll be able to explain 
some of this stuff when they come in with, you know, whether 
it’s members from SGI or whoever when it comes to the safety 
Act, and they’ll be able to provide some information on that. 
 
But again I go back to saying this. So now I’ve talked about 
using the alcohol, and again, now you’re . . . Officers suspect 
you’ve been using cannabis, that you didn’t just purchase it and 
go home. He’s smelling it and he pulled you over for whatever 
routine, and he suspects that somebody in the vehicle has been 
using it because he smells it. 
 
So now let’s just say he’s suspecting the driver. Now I don’t 
know what tools they’re going to have to be able to detect that 
you’re under the influence of cannabis or under the influence of 
a drug. You know, I’m not sure if it’s a piece of equipment 
they’re going to have, if it’s the training that they’re going to 
have to be able to detect and suspect that somebody’s doing it. 
So it’s going to be interesting to see, you know, when did 
you . . . 
 
[16:45] 
 
And I think about this and I think there’s going to be questions, 
and I think . . . I guess the person will hire a lawyer and take 
their position to court. Now having said that, they may go to 
court, and what tools are there for that individual to say, well 
no, I consumed that. Now if it’s blood tests, is it some type of 
test? When are they going to tell when you consumed that? Is it 
THC [tetrahydrocannabinol] level? Like I’m not sure, and I 
know we’re going to have to. So there’s going to be a lot of 
questions and I think I’m going to be curious to see how law 
enforcement is going to . . . I know this is going to be the 
changes in the law, and how are they going to enforce that? 
 
But it goes even further, Mr. Speaker. If the person’s found 
guilty and at the end they go through the process, and we 
understand how that’s going to happen. That the individual goes 
through the court system and is found guilty of using cannabis 
and under the influence. Now in the legislation, from my 
understanding, there is no way, you know . . . The interlock 
system for impaired driving, you have to blow in it. It’s a 



4148 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2018 

machine that’s a device . . . will allow you as the driver to 
operate a motor vehicle. You go through special training. You 
pay for the equipment to go in it, and it’s mandatory if you want 
to be driving again. So it tries to help somebody. Now if . . . and 
from my understanding you’re not going to have that when it’s 
coming with the cannabis. You will not have the interlock 
system as well for cannabis. That’s my understanding as I’ve 
read through the information, if I’m clear on that. 
 
And I know we’ll get more clarification, because maybe as 
technology and things progress, as we see it now being legal 
cannabis, there may be ways that it’s going to have to . . . And 
industry and those that do the research will find a way to . . . to 
find ways to provide this in vehicles. And I don’t know how it 
is, and maybe there’s not going to be anything, but I guess 
that’s part of the process right now if they’re not going to have 
that. So I don’t know what’s going to happen. 
 
And the other side of that too, when I think about the legislation 
of it overall, for law enforcement I can just imagine how . . . I 
haven’t talked to any of them but I’m going to. Like I’m curious 
now, thinking how that’s going to play out for them. Like how 
are they going to . . . Is it more of them getting trained? And 
they might know and it wouldn’t hurt to . . . I got some local 
members I think I’m just going to — back home — ask them 
how this will play out and do they see it as . . . Are they being 
trained? Are they getting ready for it? And what kind of . . . 
they’re already being . . . We’re already working them hard as it 
is dealing with the crime that we see all over the province. So I 
guess again I go into . . . 
 
We’re still going to have more questions and lots of questions, 
and I think the government owes those questions to 
Saskatchewan residents to keep them safe from individuals who 
are travelling on road. And this legislation I guess is trying to 
deal with that. I don’t know if it’s going to go far enough. I 
don’t know if there’s more that will have to be changed, more 
amendments, more things that will come in, but at this point the 
information that I have and that, you know, is being shared with 
us and that will go forward is . . . Again it’s limited that I feel 
from my side of it, understanding it. And I guess the research 
will have to be done, Mr. Speaker, and find out. 
 
But we’re definitely going to have more questions for the 
minister, the minister’s officials in committee when the 
committee work goes. And we’ll do that. So at this point I have 
no further comments on Bill 12 and I’m prepared to adjourn on 
it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 112, The Miscellaneous 
Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 113 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doke that Bill No. 113 — The 

Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
honour to rise this afternoon and enter into the debate around 
Bill No. 113, The Planning and Development Amendment Act. 
Now this bill has some amendments in it which ensure that the 
conflict of interest provisions apply to members of the district 
development appeals board and members of any regional 
planning authorities, Mr. Speaker, which seems quite prudent to 
members of this side of the House. 
 
Currently there are 10 cities in Saskatchewan that have been 
granted approving authority status. And there’s also an 
amendment that allows the minister to modify the terms of an 
order granting authority status to achieve a provincial interest. 
So there’s some concern about provincial government imposing 
any type of political will on a municipality as it relates to this 
amendment. Essentially, from our reading of the amendment, 
the minister will be granted ultimate authority to be able to 
amend or modify any term of an order if they deem that it’s in 
the provincial interest to do so, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we’re always concerned about ensuring that our locally 
elected leaders — in particular those folks who are, you know, 
council members and what not — are respected in the role that 
they do. They do a really important role; they serve a very 
important function in our communities. For many they are the 
front lines of concern of many folks I find when I go door 
knocking. The first concern that’s shared to me are usually 
around sidewalks and snow clearing, Mr. Speaker, and 
conditions of streets, which is the jurisdiction of city council. 
So I very much respect the work that they do. They’re not doing 
it for the money, by any stretch of the imagination, and are 
doing a really important service. 
 
So we want to ensure that their voices are being protected and 
that their independence is being respected by the provincial 
government. This is a government that has continuously 
downloaded responsibility, provincial responsibility onto 
municipalities while at the same time cutting funding to them, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. So we worry when we see more of that 
encroachment by the government on municipalities. 
 
There’s another pretty clear example of that, Mr. Speaker, in 
this city, and that’s the Wascana Centre Authority, which was 
an organization that for decades has been operating well under 
the structure that it had been operating until very recently that 
allowed for . . . They’re the folks that were sitting on the board 
comprised of city council, University of Regina, and the 
provincial government, Mr. Speaker. But the numbers of folks 
that were sitting there made it so that at any time two of those 
groups could cancel out the other group. But very recently that 
structure has changed so that the provincial government now 
has the majority on that board, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So city 
council has had their ability to raise their voice essentially 
neutered, as well as the University of Regina, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And we’re seeing the encroachment of further privatization on 



May 1, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4149 

the Wascana Park, which is really the gem of the city, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And I raise that as an example of this 
provincial government, the Sask Party using their power to 
encroach on the power of municipalities. And so when we see 
this amendment here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is why we’re 
raising this type of concern because we’ve seen how this has 
played out in other facets, and we worry about what this is 
going to mean for the future. 
 
Another example that this could be used would be land that’s 
used for P3 schools, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So if the municipality 
hasn’t designated something as school land, the provincial 
government can come in and, to my understanding of the 
amendment, the provincial government can come in and 
designate that it’s for provincial interest for this land to be 
designated as is for a school, for a P3 school, and just go in 
there and usurp the power of the municipalities. 
 
Any order that a minister issues under this new section must be 
published in the Gazette, so it will give us the opportunity to 
know what’s going on if that change is made, if a term is 
modified. But it will be after the fact. So it’s not like it’s a piece 
of legislation that we’re going to debate in the House and we’re 
going to raise concerns. It will have already been done. The 
order will have already been issued, and we’ll know after the 
fact as it will show up in the Gazette. 
 
Now currently the ability to apply policies for site plan control 
is limited right now to commercial and industrial land, but this 
bill will expand to include institutional and mixed-use 
development. We’ve heard that some developers are concerned 
with this bill, so I know that the critic is going to be asking 
questions at committee and will likely ask many questions 
around consultation. Have developers been made aware . . . 
Well we know developers have been made aware of the bill, but 
what feedback have they received with respect to developers? 
And what is their arguments for going against the concerns that 
have been raised by those developers, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Municipal planning bylaws will now, subject to this bill being 
passed, will be submitted to the director of community planning 
instead of the Minister of Government Relations. But despite 
this, the minister had and still continues to have the ability to 
require municipalities to amend their official community plan to 
achieve consistency with provincial interests, which again is a 
concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we see encroachment by 
the province into municipal planning. 
 
So if a municipality makes an official community plan, the 
minister can . . . and it has always had the ability to force 
municipalities to amend their official community plan, which 
makes me again think about Wascana Park.  
 
Now the city of Regina has developed a downtown 
improvement plan, which talks about ensuring that we’re 
focusing growth, especially in terms of the commercial sector in 
the downtown area, Mr. Speaker. But when we hear threats of 
selling off buildings in Wascana Park, which again is a gem for 
this city, when we hear about the sound stage, for example, 
maybe being sold off to a corporate interest for maybe an office 
tower — which is something that we’ve now learned is going to 
built in Wascana Park — while at the same time we’re seeing 
vacancy rates, higher vacancy rates in downtown, in the 

downtown Regina core, it doesn’t match with the city of 
Regina’s downtown improvement plan, with their community 
plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
 
So there’s some concerns. We’re already seeing the province 
encroach on the city of Regina and do what’s best, what they 
feel is best for the Sask Party’s interests, Mr. Speaker, but it’s 
not necessarily what city council would say is best for the city 
of Regina’s interest, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So it’s concerning when you see that there is this power, that 
although we have locally elected city council members, that 
their power can be usurped by the province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
There’s also a new section that adds some flexibility for 
timelines, that the municipalities have to abide by the minister’s 
orders. There’s also another section which requires 
municipalities to develop their school site policies 
collaboratively with the Minister of Education, any local school 
division in any municipalities that the Ministry of Education 
determines is necessary, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s really 
good people at the municipal level who know their areas, who 
know the wards in their locations that they represent, and again 
there’s some concerns about that. 
 
There are many changes throughout this bill, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that will impact municipalities and how they can plan, 
develop, and address regional issues. So I know the critic has 
been having a lot of discussions with municipalities and other 
stakeholders about how this bill is going to impact them. We’ve 
already heard some concerns from developers about this bill. 
 
I know the critic has been doing really good work on this. We 
really appreciate the consultations that the critic has been 
receiving, and we are sure that there will be more to come. I 
know that the critic is looking forward to speaking about that 
when that opportunity arises. But I do know that there’s other 
colleagues of mine who are looking forward to entering into the 
debate on Bill 113, so at this point I’m ready to adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 113. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas 
Park has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 113, The Planning 
and Development Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, so committees 
may sit tonight, I move a motion that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 



4150 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2018 

until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4119 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4119 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4119 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4120 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4120 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4120 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4120 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4120 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4121 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4121 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Number of Physicians in Saskatchewan 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4121 
 Final Year for the Regina Police Service Half Marathon 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4121 
 Brain Tumour Awareness Month 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4122 
 May Day 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4122 
 STARS Helipad in Lloydminster 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4122 
 Notre Dame Hounds Win Telus Cup 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4123 
 Full Gospel Business Men’s Fellowship Banquet 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4123 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Measures to Prevent Domestic Violence 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4123 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4123 
 Costs and Benefits of Public-Private Partnerships 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4124 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4124 
 Wage Rates in Saskatchewan 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4125 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4125 
 Global Transportation Hub and Land Transactions 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4125 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4125 
 Administrative Segregation in Correctional Facilities 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4126 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4126 
 Support for Mental Health and Addictions in the North 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4127 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4127 
 National Pharmacare Program 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4127 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4127 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 129 — The Saskatchewan Technology Start-up Incentive Act 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4128 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4129 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 127 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4130 
  Brkich (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 4131 
 Bill No. 128 — The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2018 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4131 
  Brkich (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 4131 



 

 Bill No. 107 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2017 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4132 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 4133 
 Bill No. 94 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4133 
  Brkich (referral to Human Services Committee) ................................................................................................................. 4135 
 Bill No. 85 — The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4135 
  Brkich (referral to Economy Committee) ............................................................................................................................. 4136 
 Bill No. 126 — The Energy Export Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4136 
 Bill No. 124 — The Environmental Management and Protection 
 (Environmental Handling Charges) Amendment Act, 2018 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4137 
 Bill No. 125 — The Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4138 
 Bill No. 81 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4140 
 Bill No. 83 — The Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4142 
 Bill No. 89 — The School Choice Protection Act/Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4144 
 Bill No. 111 — The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4145 
 Bill No. 112 — The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4146 
 Bill No. 113 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4148 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


