


















































May 17, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 61A  THURSDAY, MAY 17, 2018, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4319 
 May 17, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. To you and through you I would like to introduce to 
all members a group of 48 very good-looking students from the 
Willowgrove School in the Willowgrove constituency. Yes, 
let’s give them a wave. 
 
They were up early this morning and are looking forward to an 
exciting day. I had a chance to have a picture taken with them 
earlier, and I look forward to meeting with them right after 
question period. They’re accompanied by their teachers David 
Pratte and Stephanie Fernandez, and chaperones Renee Back, 
Cody Rakai, Cindy Suski, Sarah Buck, Sherry Sargent, and Lisa 
Bolton. Now in talking to the chaperones, I understand that 
many of them were up late last night watching the hockey game 
and then up early to make their way here. And I thank them for 
their good wishes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Willowgrove School is one of four new schools in 
the Saskatoon Willowgrove constituency. It’s a beautiful 
school. So I ask all members to help me welcome all the 
students and teachers and chaperones to their Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s a tremendous honour to welcome a constituent 
and friend and guest to the Saskatchewan legislature here today. 
Seated in your gallery, I have Michael Eluwa. Give us a wave 
there, Michael. Michael’s an incredible caregiver over at 
Pioneer Village, providing care to those that certainly deserve 
security. And he’s a real leader within the community as well 
and someone I’m lucky to count as a friend. 
 
He’s joined by family here today. He’s joined by two people, 
his cousins, that have chosen to build . . . or actually his niece 
and her husband, who have chosen to build their life here in 
Saskatchewan. They’re from Nigeria. They’re doing what so 
many have done before, coming to Canada looking for 
opportunity, and building and bettering our province in the 
process. So I welcome Ebele and Anozie Nwagbara from 
Nigeria and now . . . to Saskatchewan and to Canada. And I 
thank them for what they’ll do in building their lives here 
within our province. 
 
It’s also an honour to welcome from Raleigh, North Carolina, 
Michael’s cousins that are here today: John and Gail Eluwa 
here today. They’re looking forward to observing the British 
parliamentary process. They watch the UK [United Kingdom] 
question period. They’re looking forward to ours here today. 
John is a criminal defence lawyer, Mr. Speaker, and Gail is a 
director for the Secretary of State, working directly with 

charitable organizations throughout North Carolina. I ask all 
members to welcome these guests to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, it’s my great pleasure to 
introduce my favourite daughter, Mandy, in the west gallery 
along with my first, my only, and my favourite granddaughter, 
Lilianna Heather, otherwise known as Lily. They’re visiting 
from Toronto. I noticed she was playing with the kids in front 
of her or maybe that was pulling their hair. I think she’s going 
to be a troublemaker like her grandfather. So I would ask 
everyone to welcome them here to this Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, seated in the west gallery, is a constituent of mine 
from Garden River Road in Saskatchewan Rivers, Jill Rowden. 
And with her accompanying is her daughter, Alexi Rowden, a 
U of R [University of Regina] Cougar basketball player. But 
she is also the summer student for the member from Saskatoon 
Silverspring-Sutherland. So I would like the Assembly to give 
them a warm welcome to their Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
today to once again introduce to this Assembly my constituency 
assistant and good friend, Twyla Harris, who’s seated in the 
east gallery today. Twyla, despite only working for about six 
months in the constituency office, is completely running the 
show there, and I feel very confident every time I come here to 
Regina that she’s keeping the home fires burning there. So I do 
appreciate all the work that she does in helping out the good 
people of Saskatoon Fairview and would like to welcome her 
again to her Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you, I’d like to join with my colleague in 
welcoming Jill Rowden to her Legislative Chamber here. I got 
to know Jill when I was on the Prince Albert police board 
commission and with her work with the police department in 
Prince Albert, and her husband is the acting police chief. 
 
But most importantly is she’s here visiting Alexi, who I was 
trying to get to work in my office as a summer student, but 
unfortunately she’s across the hall. Anyway Alexi is a great 
basketball player, and I think she gets it from her mother, not 
from her father for sure. So anyway, Mr. Speaker, I’d like the 
members to join me in welcoming Jill to her Legislative 
Chamber. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Pasqua. 



4320 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2018 

Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise today 
to present a petition from the citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decisions to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I do like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Regina. I do 
so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 

Regina Hosts the 100th Memorial Cup 
 
Mr. Hindley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The May long 
weekend is almost here and some people are heading out to the 
lake to catch some sun. But there’s also going to be thousands 
of people heading indoors, Mr. Speaker, trying to get close to 
the ice as they head to the Brandt Centre here in Regina to take 
in some junior hockey, as the 100th Memorial Cup gets under 
way starting on Friday night. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the tournament will feature the host Regina Pats, 
the Hamilton Bulldogs from the OHL [Ontario Hockey 
League], the Acadie-Bathurst Titan from the QMJHL [Quebec 
Major Junior Hockey League], and of course the Swift Current 
Broncos. Yes, Mr. Speaker, the Broncos claimed the WHL 
[Western Hockey League] crown on Sunday night against a city 
with which I share the same name but not the same affinity for 
their hockey club, the Everett Silvertips, and with a big win on 
Sunday night in Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the tournament organizers in Regina have done a 
fantastic job getting ready for the Memorial Cup. Countless 
hours of preparation, all the volunteers who are needed to make 
this event a success. There will be 19 concerts taking place 
during the week-long tournament and thousands of people 
filling the hotels and restaurants. I’m sure the city of Regina 
and indeed the whole province will shine in hosting the best 
junior hockey teams in the nation and their fans as well. 
 
Our province has done it before, whether it’s hosting the Grey 
Cup or the World Junior Hockey Championship or the Brier or 
the Tournament of Hearts, just to name a few major events that 
we’ve hosted here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But I hope, Mr. Speaker, that they are prepared — prepared for 
the sea of green and blue that is headed this way from 
southwest Saskatchewan. The Swift Current Broncos and their 
fans, they’re coming this way to Regina. Congratulations to the 
organizers of the 100th Memorial Cup. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an exiting day in the 
heartland of Canadian hockey. Today the puck drops on the 
festivities for the historic 100th Memorial Cup which is being 
hosted right here in the Queen City. Not only is Saskatchewan 
hosting the Cup, but we also have two teams in the big dance: 
the WHL champions, Swift Current Broncos; and our host 
team, the Regina Pats. 
 
Now I’ll congratulate the Broncos for their championship win 
and wish them well but, Mr. Speaker, let me be clear. I’ll be 
rooting for Sam Steel and my hometown Pats. 
 
We know that the action on the ice will be intense as these 
young players battle for junior hockey supremacy but, Mr. 
Speaker, hockey isn’t the only entertainment on display. 
There’s an impressive 19 concerts during the tournament, 
including Saskatchewan’s Dead South, The Sheepdogs, and 
tonight I’m looking forward to attending the Eagles following 
the Cup’s opening ceremonies. 
 
I want to take this time to welcome all the players, the coaches, 
the teams, the fans, and families from across Canada to Regina, 
and I wish them all well. And I want to congratulate the 
incredible tournament organizing committees and the hundreds 
of volunteers who are going to make this 100th edition of the 
Memorial Cup an incredible success. Thank you so much. Go, 
Pats, go! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 

Prince Albert Resident Donates to Children’s Hospital 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m proud to rise today and acknowledge Malcolm Jenkins, a 
resident and more importantly a friend of mine from Prince 
Albert. On Tuesday of this week Malcolm and his family 
generously donated $1 million to the Jim Pattison Children’s 
Hospital Foundation. Malcolm made the donation in honour of 
his mother, Lilian Jenkins, who he describes as the best mom in 
the world. These funds will go to support the family room in the 
neonatal care, and fittingly the room will also be named after 
Lilian Jenkins. 
 
Over the years Malcolm and his family have been instrumental 
in the development of many projects and initiatives in Prince 
Albert, including the Broadway North Theatre Company, the 
Performing Arts Warehouse, the Kinsmen Skateboard Park, the 
Alfred Jenkins Field House, and that’s just to name a few, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
He has served as honorary Chair for the Prince Albert Relay for 
Life, and in 2010 matched all the funds raised, personally 
donating over 300,000 to the event. His dedication to the 
improvement of the lives of the citizens in this province is 
remarkable. He has led the way by supporting numerous events 
and activities for the Victoria Hospital Foundation, which has 
allowed for the purchase of much-needed medical equipment. 
 
His latest donation to the children’s hospital is another example 
of his continued devotion to this province. His personal motto is 
“Let’s build it for the kids,” and we thank Malcolm and his 
family for doing just that. His contribution to the children’s 



May 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4321 

hospital will help families and children for years to come. 
Thank you, Malcolm. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Community Garden Spots Available for New Canadians 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize the 
efforts of a special group of Regina residents who are making 
newcomers feel welcome in a unique way: through gardening. 
With a $7,000 grant, Regina’s South Zone Community Gardens 
has expanded to include 24 new plots for Syrian refugee 
families and one family from Tanzania. Zahid Sheikh, the 
organizer credited with this idea, said providing these gardens 
will give these families an opportunity to reconnect with the 
earth. 
 
The garden has already created some excitement with the 
families, especially those who gardened back home. Anestory 
Mhozya and his family are from Tanzania, and he used to farm. 
In a CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] story released 
May 15th, he said he was happy to hear about this garden 
project because buying fresh produce can be costly. 
 
Fawzi Almazalma, who is from Syria, used to grow olive trees. 
Although olive trees may not prosper here, he told CBC that he 
is still looking forward to working in the garden. He said, “This 
is my dream in my country — big farm and stay beside the 
vegetables.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members to congratulate the 
South Zone Community Garden and organizers, including 
Zahid Sheikh and Robert Guthrie, for their hard work. We wish 
the families all the best this gardening season. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Jeans and Jewels Gala 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
month I had the opportunity to attend the Jim Pattison 
Children’s Hospital Foundation’s Jeans and Jewels Gala at 
TCU Place in Saskatoon. The event was presented by Mosaic, 
with all funds raised supporting urgent pediatric and maternal 
equipment needed for the Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital, 
which is now 84 per cent complete. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The gala included a delicious dinner, live and silent auction 
packages, live entertainment, as well as a photo booth, which 
provided for some funny pictures to commemorate the event. 
The Saskatchewan Blue Cross showed support for the event, 
donating $5 for every tweet using the hashtag 
#SaskBlueCrossforKids throughout the gala. 
 
Our government has provided over $235 million to help make 
the dream of a Saskatchewan children’s hospital a reality. With 
the help of the hard-working folks at the Children’s Hospital 
Foundation as well as generous community donors, the hospital 
will open its doors in the fall of 2019. Our children deserve the 

best care possible while staying close to home to alleviate some 
of the stress to them and their families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the attendees, sponsors, and 
volunteers for ensuring the Jeans and Jewels Gala was a 
success. Thanks to their hard work, the gala raised over 
$220,000, which will be used to care for our children and 
grandchildren. 
 
Our government looks forward to continuing to work with the 
children’s hospital as well as the foundation to ensure children 
in this province have high-quality and timely care. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Fire and Rescue Surf and Turf Fundraiser 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was pleased to 
attend the ninth annual Buckland Fire and Rescue Surf and 
Turf. This annual fundraiser raises money for the Buckland Fire 
and Rescue unit, helping to raise awareness and purchase useful 
equipment for their firefighting and rescue operations. Over 500 
lobsters were brought in for this dinner. The event also featured 
live music and auctions, with proceeds going towards the fire 
hall. It’s always an enjoyable evening, presented wonderfully 
by this group of proud volunteers. 
 
Buckland Co-operative Volunteer Firefighters have served the 
RM [rural municipality] of Buckland and greater area for more 
than 45 years. Starting in 1969, Buckland Fire and Rescue was 
started by forward-thinking individuals who worked tirelessly 
for many years to guide and help develop the department into 
what it is today. 
 
Each decade the department has introduced new technologies 
and have been acquiring and maintaining the proper equipment 
to better serve their community and area. Events like the Surf 
and Turf help the department raise funds for those important 
services. Their services provided include firefighting, vehicle 
rescue, trench rescue, confined space, water rescue, and search 
and rescue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and colleagues, please join me in honouring and 
thanking Buckland Fire and Rescue for volunteering and 
keeping us safe. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Physician Recruitment in Rural Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s good to see the Leader of the Opposition finally getting out 
to rural Saskatchewan. In May 3rd’s Tisdale Recorder where 
the leader states that his party is interested in the Northeast, he 
finally spoke about doctor recruitment. Mr. Speaker, the leader 
stated that the recruitment of doctors is a long-term health 
human resources issue. He also states that he would work with 
the College of Medicine to broaden their approach, to having 
more recruitment of people from rural areas, and provide more 
training in rural areas. 
 



4322 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2018 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to report that our government has 
been taking action on all these fronts. Since 2007 we’ve 
increased the number of doctors by 900, the number of 
Canadian-trained physicians by 36 per cent. We’ve added 40 
more seats to the College of Medicine, doubled the number of 
residency positions to 120, and today there are 159 more 
graduates practising in the province. 
 
Through SIPPA [Saskatchewan international physician practice 
assessment], we have recruited and developed over 200 
internationally trained physicians, with 77 per cent of them 
practising in rural Saskatchewan.  
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of rural Saskatchewan still remember 
the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] record of health care: 52 
hospitals closed, two in my constituency. If history has taught 
us anything, Mr. Speaker, it’s that the prescription for 
increasing the number of doctors in rural Saskatchewan is 
keeping the members opposite in opposition. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Donations to Political Parties 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan’s election finance laws are broken. We’re one of 
the last places where corporate donations, union donations, and 
out-of-province donations aren’t just allowed, they’re 
unlimited. Fixing these outdated rules, it’s not just common 
sense; it’s something that people across the province support. A 
clear majority of Saskatchewan people believe the corporate, 
union, and out-of-province donations should be banned. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s because these donations open the door to 
questions, legitimate questions about whose interests are truly 
being served in our democratic process. As New Democrats, we 
believe it’s time. It’s time to close that door once and for all. 
Our bill will cap individual donations, eliminate 
out-of-province donations, and ban corporate and union 
donations for good. 
 
What is it that the Premier doesn’t like about this very sensible 
idea, Mr. Speaker? Why doesn’t he think Saskatchewan 
democracy should belong to Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, in this province under The 
Election Act, all registered parties, Mr. Speaker, must publicly 
report any donations over $250, Mr. Speaker. Any time there’s 
a general election, all parties involved must report the expenses 
that are incurred during that general election, Mr. Speaker. The 
same holds true for any by-election that may occur, Mr. 
Speaker. As I said, all donations over $250 are publicly 
reported, Mr. Speaker. They’re communicated to anyone who 
should choose to explore them, Mr. Speaker, on the Internet, on 
the Elections Saskatchewan site. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, here in the province, we 
had last year 26,000 donors — personal donors — to this party, 
on average about $65 per donation, Mr. Speaker. We have 

donors from across the party, across the province, Mr. Speaker. 
We also had about 1,000 corporations that donated to our party, 
Mr. Speaker, across Canada, and their average donation was 
about $1,000, Mr. Speaker, all publicly disclosed on the 
Internet, all publicly disclosed to Elections Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, as are all the expenses in any election. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Treatment of Former Member Regarding 
Irrigation Project 

 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is truly disappointing 
that the Premier doesn’t understand the importance of restoring 
trust in our democratic system. Mr. Speaker, the other day, the 
Premier also failed to answer some pretty basic questions about 
his meetings with Mr. Boyd and the irrigation project that he 
was trying to get approved at the time. 
 
Who was at that meeting? Where did it happen? Was it before 
or after Mr. Boyd’s now infamous trip to China? Were there 
any records or notes taken at that meeting? You know, the 
Premier’s had another day or two to look back at his calendar 
and get his facts straight. Has he checked his notes? Does he 
have the answer to these basic questions today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, those questions were answered 
on the floor of this Assembly. They were answered in the 
rotunda. They were answered honestly, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
recall the date that I met with that individual. 
 
I don’t recall the date, Mr. Speaker, that I met on multiple 
occasions with the member from Athabasca on constituency 
work throughout northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I 
don’t recall who was at those meetings, whether they were 
scheduled meetings or whether they were meetings in this 
House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, is we engage with people 
across the floor, and across the province as ministers do, as 
MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] do on both sides 
of this House, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we are properly 
representing people from across this great province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But in the case, in the case of this individual, the advice that 
was provided to him was precisely the same as the advice that 
was provided to people across the province and in the case 
across the floor, Mr. Speaker, to the member of Athabasca and 
others that I have met with is, you need to approach the relevant 
agencies, Mr. Speaker, in this case the Water Security Agency, 
the Ministry of Environment for aquatic habitat protection 
permits, Mr. Speaker. That advice is the same, Mr. Speaker, no 
matter who we meet with. But we’ll continue to engage with 
people across the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, it’s again disappointing that the 
Premier has not or has chosen not to track that information 
down. And I do have another question about that meeting that 



May 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4323 

has not been answered. When the Premier sat down with Mr. 
Boyd and looked at the plans to discuss that irrigation project, 
did he meet with Mr. Boyd on his own or were there other 
people accompanying Mr. Boyd? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Again, Mr. Speaker, those questions have 
been asked on this floor. They’ve been answered. They’ve been 
asked in the rotunda, and again they’ve been answered. They’ve 
been answered honestly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t recall who was in the meetings with myself and the 
member from Athabasca and other members. And, Mr. Speaker, 
I don’t recall who was in that meeting with Mr. Boyd at that 
time. But I do recall that he did, he did show me an irrigation 
plan, Mr. Speaker. And the advice to that individual, as it is the 
same to any individual that we meet with, Mr. Speaker, is to get 
in touch with the appropriate agencies, Mr. Speaker. Get in 
touch with them; they will give you advice on the appropriate 
permits that are required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite keep putting this forward 
as, as there was something untoward that happened here. In this 
case, Mr. Speaker, the regulations of the province were not 
followed. Mr. Speaker, in this case, the individual was charged. 
He pled guilty, Mr. Speaker, to two counts. He was assessed 
one of the highest fines ever handed out under these regulations, 
Mr. Speaker, as well as ordered to rehabilitate the riverbank, 
Mr. Speaker. I think that is proof in this case, Mr. Speaker, that 
no matter who you are in the province of Saskatchewan, you’ll 
be treated equally through all of the processes that we have. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is quite strange to not 
remember who was in that meeting. That’s quite an unusual 
thing. Certainly I think people would be very surprised that 
someone couldn’t recall whether there was just one person 
across from them or multiple people. It’s quite unusual, Mr. 
Speaker, and does continue to raise questions of why the 
Premier doesn’t feel he needs to answer these very direct 
questions. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s a one-on-one meeting, or with a 
small group with the minister at an undisclosed location, or the 
high-level meeting that brought in multiple DMs [deputy 
minister] including Alanna Koch — which we’ve heard was 
because this was a high-profile individual — or whether it’s the 
approval of a project for which the member under discussion 
was being charged at the time, Mr. Speaker, does the Premier 
still expect, with this list of irregularities and uncertainties, does 
he still expect people to believe that Mr. Boyd got the same 
treatment that anyone in the province would get? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I think it’s surprising that the Leader of the Opposition 
continues on these lines of questioning, particularly, as I 
pointed out yesterday, he had four hours that he personally 
could have attended estimates just a couple of nights ago and 
put these very questions to the officials . . . 

[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Member for Saskatoon Centre, please come to 
order. Thank you. I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I will acknowledge that the 
member from Saskatoon Centre, as well as the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana, asked a couple of questions in terms of the 
process that an individual such as . . . I think the member asked 
how many times WHPA [The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act] 
charges had been laid in the past. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, specific questions about why the deputy 
minister to the Premier was involved in these types of 
discussions, the members had four hours to ask those two 
officials these very questions. And what the Leader of the 
Opposition does, Mr. Speaker, is he asks the questions on the 
floor of the Assembly where there is no deputy minister to 
answer the question, Mr. Speaker. But when he has four hours, 
he doesn’t take the time to ask the question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Global Transportation Hub and Land Transactions 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the minister tried to 
minimize the revelation that taxpayers are now on the hook for 
an additional $2.9 million because they have decided not to use 
the east parcels at the GTH [Global Transportation Hub] for 
borrow land. Now remember, these are the infamous parcels 
that should have been expropriated by Highways in the first 
place instead of leaving taxpayers on the hook for the inflated 
price the GTH paid. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, on top of that $3 million paid to the GTH for 
the Marquart land that was never used, the ministry appears to 
have also paid the GTH millions to haul, strip, and borrow land 
on the GTH footprint, even Brightenview’s land — very, very 
expensive commercial land. 
 
According to the contract, GTH was given a down payment of 
$2.1 million for these services. Even though this hauling 
appears to never even happened, why would we pay a Global 
Transportation Authority to haul dirt? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, you build roads. You build 
interchanges. It requires the movement of earth. I don’t know 
what they build roads on, but we build them on earth. We have 
asphalt and we have concrete on top of them. That’s how roads 
are built in this province. And as you go ahead and do it, you 
move it from one place to another. You have borrow pits. I 
didn’t know about the term “borrow pit” until earlier this week. 
 
So they decided they wanted to acquire the land for that 
purpose. They didn’t need it, so it’s still outstanding. And you 
know what’s still there? The earth is still there. They still have 
the land ready for sale. They still have the cash that was paid. 
To the members opposite, I say, it’s a zero-sum game. There’s 
nothing taken place. 
 



4324 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2018 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the more we dig, the more dirt 
we find. It appears that Anthony Marquart’s really expensive 
land and GTH’s hauling services aren’t good enough for Vinci 
and the bypass conglomerate. Now the minister often says he 
would like the opposition’s help in supporting this project, so I 
have an idea for him. Take that borrow land that we paid six 
and a half million dollars for to the corner of Vic and Albert and 
give Capital Pointe a hand in filling their hole. That might be all 
it’s good for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:30] 
 
At the time the 2016 auditor’s report was written, she said it 
was unclear what this land was going to be used for and she 
couldn’t determine the costs and benefits at the time. Mr. 
Speaker, we know there’s a lot of dirt here, and it’s clear the 
auditor was not able to fully canvass this issue in her report. 
There are still so many questions needing answering and 
witnesses who have been blocked from testifying. 
 
Will the minister now do his part, or perhaps the Minister for 
Highways, and commit today to scheduling a committee to get 
to the bottom of this hole? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised that at this 
point in the session we’re focusing on what kind of dirt it is, 
where dirt’s being moved, how the dirt process takes place. 
Yesterday I go out to do the scrum, and because the members 
opposite are talking to the media, I’m asking . . . I’m being 
asked questions about what type of dirt is there. I don’t know. 
I’m not in the dirt business. I’m a lawyer and I’m a politician. I 
am not an expert in dirt. Now the people over there want to 
fling dirt, throw dirt, but that’s not the business that I’m in, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will say this to the member opposite. She is a 
member of the law society, has been a member of the law 
society. She knows that we are not going to get involved in 
having witnesses or doing a process while the matter is still 
under investigation, while the matter’s been referred to 
Manitoba prosecutions. Those are things that are not going to 
happen. Mr. Speaker, some point in time in the future we expect 
to get an answer from the province of Manitoba. But until then, 
we’re not doing anything else. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, a recent national report on reading, 
math, and science skills shows lower scores in Saskatchewan 
compared to other provinces. The report, prepared by the 
Council of Ministers of Education, points to a system that is 
under stress. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that underfunding and cuts to education 
are having negative impacts. We have more kids in classrooms 
with fewer teachers with fewer supports. Provinces that have 

maintained their investments in education, like BC [British 
Columbia], Alberta, and Ontario are showing scores 
significantly above the national average. By contrast, provinces 
that have seen cuts to education funding, like Saskatchewan and 
Manitoba, are seeing their scores significantly below that 
national average. 
 
Does the minister really not see the connection between his 
government’s poor treatment of education and the consequences 
of these choices? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we know our teachers 
are doing a good job with our students, Mr. Speaker. And those 
latest PCAP [Pan-Canadian assessment program] scores reflect 
the Saskatchewan students’ continuing increase, Mr. Speaker, 
with respect to performance across those sectors, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly other provinces are performing a little bit better, Mr. 
Speaker. But relative to other provinces, Mr. Speaker, but we 
are increasing our scores, Mr. Speaker, and that’s clear from the 
evidence that’s been put forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’d also like to point on the funding piece, Mr. Speaker. In 
May 9th of 2018, the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] 
said in their news release, Mr. Speaker, that per-pupil funding 
in Saskatchewan is among the highest in the country. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve shown our commitment to public education in 
this budget with a $30 million increase, which followed on the 
seven and a half million dollar in-year funding that we provided 
prior to the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That shows our continuing commitment, our continuing 
commitment to have conversations with our partners in 
education, our partners in education, Mr. Speaker, to advance 
the interests of kids in the classroom. Is there more work to do? 
You bet there is, Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to continue that 
work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt of the good work 
that teachers and boards all across this province do every day 
for kids. But there’s also no doubt that this government has cut, 
and cut deeply, the funding to education. 
 
The consequences of those cuts to education are even more 
obvious when we talk about graduation rates. As highlighted by 
the independent Children’s Advocate, indigenous youth are 
graduating at an appalling 43 per cent as compared to 
non-indigenous youth who are graduating at a rate of 85 per 
cent. But, Mr. Speaker, this Education minister and Premier, 
who relied on educators in their leadership bids, refuse to 
acknowledge their backfilling of education dollars is barely half 
of what they took. 
 
Will the minister do the right thing and at least restore the 
$24 million that this government cut from our kids’ classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — I’ve stood in this House time and time 
again and advised the House on the $30 million which has been 



May 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4325 

restored to education funding, Mr. Speaker. And I had 
mentioned in this House too the fact that school boards across 
this province have found some significant efficiencies with 
respect to their operations, Mr. Speaker. And that all benefits, 
well, Mr. Speaker, that all benefits children in the classroom. 
 
We’re going to continue to have our conversations, Mr. 
Speaker, to make sure that we are providing the right supports 
to the classroom. That’s an ongoing conversation that we’re 
having, Mr. Speaker. But for the member opposite or the 
members opposite to suggest that this government isn’t 
committed to education, committed to supporting children in 
the classroom, is just wrong, Mr. Speaker. You see that through 
our budget. You see that through the ongoing dialogue and 
conversations that we’re having with our partners in education, 
Mr. Speaker. Well they don’t want to hear the answer, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The fact of the matter is, I’ve been out talking to teachers, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ve been talking to trustees. We’ve been meeting with 
school boards, Mr. Speaker, and things are well in the sector, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re going to continue to work with them, Mr. 
Speaker, to make sure that we advance the proper interests of 
children. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Measures to Address Sexual Assault 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the 
second-highest per capita rate of sexual assaults of all the 
provinces. And stories like the one that broke yesterday 
demonstrate all too well the gravity of the situation. As a 
province, we must all do better. We need strategies for 
prevention, policies that support survivors, and movement away 
from this dangerous and heartbreaking culture that disempowers 
survivors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even though our rates are high, Saskatchewan is 
the only province that doesn’t have a sexual assault strategy. So 
today, my ask is very simple but very important: can the 
government commit today to a province-wide sexual assault 
strategy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there’s lots of things in 
this House that I don’t agree with the opposition on, but this is 
not one of them. This is something that we all take seriously, 
and all members in this Assembly can and should do more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do a lot of things in this area and we certainly 
have to do more. We’re going to have a report released in the 
next few days, and hopefully that’s going to be a starting point 
of more things that we can and should do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can say that we spend $11.4 million a year 
towards interpersonal violence and abuse services. Of that, $1.2 
million goes to sexual assault service programs across the 
province. We’ve introduced the Listen Project, which is two 
hours of free legal advice for survivors of sexual violence. In 
2015, we opened the first new transition house in Saskatchewan 

since 1989. We’ve active consultations under way on Clare’s 
Law. We have legislation in place for 10 unpaid days for 
victims and family members of victims of interpersonal 
violence. We certainly have more to do, Mr. Speaker, but we all 
recognize it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the minister is 
mentioning the quick-to-be-released report I believe on 
domestic violence. We need that. But we need a sexual assault 
strategy as well. 
 
Sexual violence often occurs on university campuses, and there 
has been continued calls for action to change the culture of our 
campuses. Mr. Speaker, comments in the media yesterday from 
a U of S [University of Saskatchewan] coach are completely 
unacceptable and show that attitudes and perceptions are very 
slow to change. Mr. Speaker, athletics is never more important 
than the safety of young women and other students. 
 
We’ve heard from survivors that the steps taken so far to 
implement sexual assault strategies do not go far enough, that 
students still do not feel safe, and that survivors are still not 
supported. A recent report graded the U of R’s plan to end 
campus sexual violence at a D-plus. 
 
Can the minister tell us how she will ensure the safety and 
support of students when it comes to sexual violence? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, I am angry. And 
this is not okay. The young man in question here was charged 
with a sexual assault on an unconscious woman and took 147 
photos of her. Now due process is important, but the coach’s 
comments bear repeating in this House, Mr. Speaker. He said, 
and I quote: 
 

No where along the lines did we take anything that had 
happened in the past into account with his involvement 
with our team. From my perspective as a coach and as a 
father, I thought being involved with our team and our 
program would be best at this particular stage of his life. 
[And then goes on to say that the individual] . . . made a 
very bad choice and decision with his actions and what he 
did for one night. And it’s cost him dearly. 

 
I ask, Mr. Speaker, what about the young woman? 
 
In October of 2017, Kevin Doherty, the then minister of 
Advanced Education, wrote to every one of our post-secondary 
institutions and said, and I quote: 
 

I expect you and your board will take a strong leadership 
role to ensure that all members of your campus community 
take their responsibilities on the issue of sexual violence 
seriously. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as mentors to not just young athletes but young 
people, we expect more from our varsity coaches. And I expect 



4326 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2018 

the university to treat this issue with the severity that it 
deserves. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the minister for 
her comments. I think we can all agree this is not a partisan 
issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s Sexual Assault Awareness Week, and 
organizations across the province are working to prevent sexual 
violence and support survivors. But due to funding restrictions, 
some organizations like the Battlefords & Area Sexual Assault 
Centre are struggling to provide the services that their 
communities need. The centre said, and I quote: 
 

Cutting programs and services to areas that desperately 
need it is not what we want to do . . . However we are left 
with no other choice if the province doesn’t increase 
funding to our organization. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the organization has not seen a funding increase 
for six years. And the Ministry of Justice knows that Meadow 
Lake and Ile-a-la-Crosse will lose services on June 30th if 
nothing changes. Can the minister commit today to providing 
this funding and ensuring these services continue? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we are in a process of 
finalizing budget, dealing with a number of issues on this. We 
recognize the challenges that exist. We know that the assault 
centres are working very hard. A lot of them are using and 
expending reserves that should be used for later or for other 
projects. We’ll continue to work with them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Apology Regarding Sixties Scoop 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s long 
past due that this government take real action and take 
responsibility for the Sixties Scoop. Manitoba has already made 
a formal apology to the survivors of the Sixties Scoop. The 
federal government has reached a settlement and is taking real 
action toward reconciliation for that community, and now 
Alberta has set a date for an apology in their legislature on the 
28th of May. 
 
When elected leader of his party, the Premier said he would 
find out what an apology would mean. Mr. Speaker, it means 
acknowledging past wrongs and working to prevent the need for 
future apologies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this government show accountability 
and issue its long-awaited apology for the Sixties Scoop and 
take real action to close gaps in health, in justice, in income, 
and education between First Nations and Métis people and the 
rest of Saskatchewan that persist today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 

Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, we certainly take all the 
concerns of our First Nations community to heart, and we’ve 
had extensive consultations, in fact even meeting with our 
federal minister yesterday. Minister Wyant and I . . . or the 
minister was . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Thank you. Had 
spent some time in a very engaged conversation. 
 
At the same time, we’ve been in extensive consultations with a 
very formalized group that involves the Sixties Scoop survivors 
and have been spending significant time with them and other 
ministry officials in putting together a plan, a moving forward 
plan as to what we’re going to do, how we’re going to 
formulate our apology, as well as the process that we’re going 
to undergo. 
 
We’ve looked at the Alberta model, certainly looking at 
different aspects of it and think theirs . . . Our Sixties Scoop 
survivors are saying that that’s a very worthwhile model that 
they’d like us to pursue. So we’re certainly very engaged with 
our Sixties Scoop survivors and we’re letting them kind of lead 
the process and lead the discussion as how they would like to 
see us put forward a very worthwhile and erstwhile apology to 
them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, again the question was to the 
Premier. This is a commitment that he has made and we really 
would like to hear what the timeline is, some more clarity on 
what that timeline is. But also I think the delay on this is really 
indicative of a failure to engage on what is the most pressing 
social issue in our province today, the great inequalities that 
exist between First Nations and Métis people and the rest of the 
province, whether it’s in health and health outcomes, whether 
it’s in education, in justice, or in income. 
 
What is this government going to do? What is this Premier’s 
government going to do to close that gap and make a real 
difference in people’s lives? 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, this government and this 
Premier has indicated that they need to have input from our 
survivors, from those that are directly involved in the Sixties 
Scoop event. So we’re not going to put a fixed date on this. 
We’re going to let them provide us with all the background 
information, discussion, negotiations, whatever they need us to 
do. We’re not going to fix a date because this is a very 
extensive and a lengthy process I believe we’re going to need to 
go through. 
 
But we will come forward with this. We’ve made that promise, 
and we’ve certainly talked to our survivors and we’ve made that 
commitment to them that this will happen. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 



May 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4327 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
instructed by the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies to report Bill No. 127, The Income Tax Amendment 
Act, 2018 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister’s requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 127 and 
that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Minister may proceed to move third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 127 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move this bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 127 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
128, The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2018 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this bill and the bill be now read 
the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 128 and 
that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 128 — The Provincial Sales Tax 
Amendment Act, 2018 

 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move this bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the minister that Bill No. 
128 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 110, The Animal 
Protection Act, 2017 with amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in the 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill 
and that the bill and its amendments be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 110 and 
that the bill and its amendments be now read a third time. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



4328 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2018 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 
time? I recognize the minister. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 110 — The Animal Protection Act, 2017 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
amendments be now read the first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 110 — The Animal Protection Act, 2017 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the minister that Bill No. 
110 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 83, The 
Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 
2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 83 and 
that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 83 — The Environmental Management and 
Protection Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — I move that the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 83 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 258 through 264. 
 
The Speaker: — Tabled 258 to 264. I recognize the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to question 265. 
 
The Speaker: — Ordered 265. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to question 266. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Can’t hear. Could you repeat? Sorry, 
Mr. Whip. 
 



May 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4329 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to question 266. 
 
The Speaker: — Table 266. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to question 267. 
 
The Speaker: — Ordered 267. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 268 through 270. 
 
The Speaker: — Tabled 268 to 270. I recognize the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to question 271. 
 
The Speaker: — Ordered 271. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 272 through 274. 
 
The Speaker: — Tabled 272 to 274. I recognize the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to question 275. 
 
The Speaker: — Ordered, 275. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 276 through 285. 
 
The Speaker: — 276 to 285. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Biggar-Saskatchewan Valley. 
 

Recruitment and Retention of Health Care Professionals 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to be 
able to take part in today’s 75-minute debate. I will be making a 
motion at the end of my remarks, but the motion topic today is 
the Government of Saskatchewan’s commitment to innovative 
solutions to recruiting and retaining physicians and nurses in 
Saskatchewan, which has led to nearly 900 more physicians and 
3,700 more nurses since 2007. 
 
But I think it’s important that we take a step back before we get 
into the details of what our government has done, some very 
innovative and important things that we’ve done since 2007, 
and really give a lay of the land before the Saskatchewan Party 
formed government. 
 
Before members on this side formed government, the province, 
some would say, was in crisis on many different fronts. Just 

look at the population numbers; the population had dropped by 
22,000 people. From 1996 to 2007, population was in decline. 
You know, we were declining as far as growth in the economy, 
as well as people in this province. 
 
We would sit in opposition, and listen to members say that 
statistically it was impossible to grow the population of this 
province by more than the 1 per cent that the opposition had 
forecast was possible if we formed government. It was quite 
disheartening to see the NDP government of the day to make 
comments like that. You know, they had ministers saying that, 
you know, more people left, well there’d be more for the rest of 
us. And we’d always say no, when people left for Alberta or 
around the world, there wasn’t more for the rest of us. We 
really lost something in Saskatchewan. 
 
And this really speaks to our health care professionals. They 
would leave. Yes, they were leaving in droves to mainly 
Alberta, but around the country and around the world, to take 
up jobs, and there wasn’t more for the rest of us when they left. 
It was a loss to this province, and it was very disheartening. 
 
Saskatchewan lost 450 nurses and 173 doctors from 2001 to 
2006. At that time, Saskatchewan had the longest surgical wait 
times in Canada. Under the NDP government of those days, 
they closed 52 hospitals, mainly in rural Saskatchewan. They 
also closed the Plains hospital here in Regina. You know, you 
look at how they treated seniors in those days. They closed 
1,200 long-term care beds. On the seniors’ income plan benefit, 
there was not an increase in the benefit for 16 years under the 
NDP government. 
 
So just given that type of, you know, feeling that was in the 
province makes it very important how we, when we came into 
government in 2007, how we looked at the situation. You know, 
we also had the former NDP Health minister saying that, you 
know, they didn’t want to have targets about how many more 
nurses that would be hired in the province because they may not 
meet the target. Well you know, they weren’t going to meet the 
target because they didn’t put anything in place to meet those 
targets. They didn’t want more nurses and doctors because they 
were planning for decline in the province. People were leaving, 
and they didn’t feel they needed to have targets to increase the 
number of nurses and doctors in the province. 
 
When we formed government in 2007, you know, some were 
saying that health care . . . Well health care was in a crisis. But 
at what point were people’s health and lives were going to be at 
risk because of the lack of, particularly, registered nurses and 
doctors? And it was getting very, very serious at that time, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So when we came into government in 2007, our government 
made a decision to give an increase in salary — I believe it was 
35 per cent over three years — to registered nurses, and that 
was one very important thing, because under the NDP 
government we were not paying nurses the salary that would 
keep them in the province. They could go to Alberta and other 
places for much more money, and they were leaving. So there 
was no doubt that that had to be addressed. And we did that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, When we formed government it was the member 



4330 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2018 

from Indian Head-Milestone was the Health minister. And he 
had to take on a very heavy load, trying to deal with all these 
issues in health care, and he’s done a fantastic job. He did a 
fantastic job, and he’s followed by the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, who did an amazing job as well as 
Health minister. And today our current Health minister 
continues to do an amazing job to keep health care on track and 
for the safety and health of the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
[11:00] 
 
So I want to talk about innovation in this motion. I think there’s 
a number of things that we have done as a government which 
speaks to innovation. So obviously one of the problems was the 
shortage of physicians in Saskatchewan and mainly rural 
Saskatchewan. So there was a kind of an archaic process of 
trying to get doctors accredited in the province. So our 
government changed things and brought in the Saskatchewan 
international physician practice assessment or SIPPA. And it’s a 
made-in-Saskatchewan solution with supports to recruit many 
more physicians to our province by assessing foreign-trained 
family physicians from a broad range of countries. 
 
And I have to say at this point as well is, you know, many 
questions. How do you, how do you recruit physicians? Well 
through our experience, I just know from the town of Biggar, 
the best resource to recruit physicians is the physicians that’s in 
the community. In Biggar we traditionally have had three 
physicians and occasionally we would go down to two. And 
there were would be, well quite frankly, it would be a serious 
problem. Many people, there were people who’d be trying to go 
to other communities or just going into a waiting room, 
emergency waiting list, quite frankly. 
 
So over the last few years when it was down to two doctors in 
Biggar, the clinic, which was owned by the two remaining 
doctors, they would recruit physicians and they were very good 
at it. And so they had a key role in recruiting physicians, 
whether they were international physicians or from around the 
province or from around the country. The community stepped 
forward and financially made a commitment to retain, recruit 
physicians, and over time we’re back to a stable, 
three-physician community, which is really, really a benefit to 
the area and to the citizens in and around Biggar. 
 
So first, best recruiter is the physicians being helped financially, 
and more than just financially, just on a personal level to help 
these people integrate into the community with their children 
and their spouses. Looking for a job for the spouse is very 
important. 
 
You know, the health regions then — now it’s one health region 
— they play a key role in recruiting as well. And under the 
Saskatchewan Party government we have Saskdocs, which is 
the provincial recruiting agents, to go find doctors around the 
country and around the world. So everyone working together, 
we have made tremendous strides in the recruitment of 
physicians. 
 
And SIPPA is just another very important way of getting these 
doctors accredited and into our communities in the province. So 
now nearly 900 more physicians are practising in the province 
compared to 2007. That’s a 51 per cent increase overall: 62 per 

cent increase in specialists, 43 per cent increase in general 
practitioners, 98 per cent increase in pediatrics. In the same 
time, the provincial population has increased by 17.5 per cent. 
 
Through the Saskatchewan international physician practice 
assessment program, or SIPPA, over 200 hundred doctors are 
currently practising in the province. One hundred fifty-four of 
these are practising in rural or remote communities. As of 
March 2017, approximately 52.9 per cent of physicians 
practising in Saskatchewan received a medical education from 
outside the country. For family physicians this number is 65.5 
per cent, and for specialists it’s 38.3 per cent. We have one of 
the best physician compensation rates in the country. As part of 
this compensation package, we provide special incentives to 
doctors in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So I’ll just move on to the other very important areas when we 
talk about nurses. As I said, we gave a salary increase that was 
much needed. And so our record now is that over 16,000 nurses 
of all designations call Saskatchewan home, 3,700 more than in 
2007. That’s a 27 per cent increase in registered nurses since 
2007, 48 per cent increase in LPNs [licensed practical nurse], 
and 126 per cent in nurse practitioners. 
 
In 2016 Saskatchewan had 923 RNs [registered nurse] per 
100,000 people, well above the Canadian average of 796. We 
delivered on our promise to hire 900 more registered nurses, 
added 300 more registered nurses, RPN [registered practical 
nurse] training seats, and doubled the number of nurse 
practitioner training seats from 20 to 40. So very important 
innovations to recruit and retain health care professionals. 
 
Now another innovation that we brought in was CECs, 
collaborative emergency centres, to improve the access to 
health care in rural and remote communities. They are designed 
to provide care for 24-7 to help stabilize and improve access to 
primary health care and emergency services, and during the day 
the public has access to a primary health care team, including 
physicians and nurse practitioners which extend hours on 
evenings and weekends. Overnight the care is handled by a 
registered nurse and paramedic team with a physician oversight 
by phone. 
 
Saskatchewan has opened three collaborative emergency 
centres in Maidstone in 2013; Shaunavon, 2013; Canora, 2014; 
and additional CECs are being implemented in Wakaw and 
Spiritwood. As of March 2017, over 4,000 patients have been 
served and 77 per cent have been able to stay in the community 
rather than transfer to another hospital. So CECs have been a 
very innovative program that has come in. It’s been very 
successful. 
 
Back on the physician recruitment front, something else was 
very important is that we’ve added 40 seats to the College of 
Medicine, from 60 to 100, and doubled the number of residency 
positions from 60 to 120. We expanded the distribution of 
postgraduate medical education to Prince Albert, Swift Current, 
La Ronge, North Battleford, and Moose Jaw. Further plans are 
in development for additional sites. 
 
One hundred per cent of medical residents in 2017 graduating 
classes from Swift Current and Moose Jaw decided to stay and 
practise in Saskatchewan. And I think that point we have to 



May 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4331 

make again and again and again. These innovations have . . . 
you know, when students do their residency in smaller urban 
centres around the province, they tend to stay in those 
communities and service those communities that they have been 
trained in. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my time is running out, so my other 
colleagues would like to say a few words. So, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to make a motion: 
 

That this Assembly supports the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s commitment to innovation solutions to 
recruiting and retaining physicians and nurses in 
Saskatchewan, which has led to nearly 900 more 
physicians and 3,700 more nurses since 2007. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Biggar-Sask 
Valley has moved: 
 

That this Assembly supports the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s commitment to innovative solutions to 
recruiting and retaining physicians and nurses in 
Saskatchewan, which has led to nearly 900 more 
physicians and 3,700 more nurses since 2007. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to enter 
into the 75-minute debate today. It will probably come as no 
surprise to members opposite that I will not be supporting the 
motion put forward by the member from Biggar-Sask Valley 
today, and there are a few reasons for this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
which I will get into. 
 
The first question is, I think, quite obvious to folks who are 
asking questions and approach things with a critical lens, and 
that is what is the per capita change in the number of 
representation because that information is conveniently left out. 
Often we see this Sask Party government reporting raw 
numbers back to us, and the question I always have is, what was 
the per capita change? If we’re going to do this, we’re looking 
back 11 years and we’re picking this amount of time, I’d like to 
be able to see something that actually represents how many 
people exist. 
 
We see the same problem in terms of their reporting of numbers 
in education, and I know that the Education critic talks about 
this quite frequently as well. So this is something that I would 
like to see before I would be able to support a motion like this. 
And I see the Minister for Rural and Remote Health heckling 
me right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But what I would 
appreciate is getting some of those details about the per capita 
representation because I think those are important. 
 
There is still an important piece. There’s still some shortages 
that exist here as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we know that 
there is still shortages in terms of recruiting family doctors and 
emergency medicine physicians, and that this disproportionately 
impacts some communities in our province more than others. 
 

So we’ve heard concerns about shortages that still exist in the 
Southeast, the Arcola and Carlyle areas out to Estevan. We 
know there have been concerns with people who want to have 
babies in Estevan, and whether they have the care there for that 
to take place. The Wolseley hospital being shut down, 
Preeceville hospital not having its 24-hour emergency room 
anymore, Mr. Speaker. And we know the impact that that has 
on folks in removing those emergency services which are so 
essential. 
 
And when we consider the compounding effects of losing our 
provincial transit system, STC [Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company], with some of the lack of services that exist in these 
areas, we’re happy to give credit where credit’s due, but I’m not 
convinced that that is the case here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There 
are still a number of areas in Saskatchewan health care that are 
suffering. And unlike the members opposite who may believe 
that privatization is the answer to better health care, we say give 
it the resources it needs to survive and to thrive in this province, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We’ve all heard stories of folks waiting all day in the 
emergency room, or we’ve been that person, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker; of services being cut in rural communities, as recently 
as lab services being cut in Ituna, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
remember the member from Saskatoon Riversdale doing some 
good work in raising awareness about some of those lab 
services, and getting partial restoration. Another story of this 
government’s approach of cut first and ask questions later.  
 
Stories about long wait times for mental health. Can you 
imagine children waiting two years to see a psychiatrist, and the 
damaging effect that can be done during what is a very 
formative time in the child’s development? And of course the 
med school in our province being on probation due to historic 
funding cuts, cuts they’ve never seen, like they saw in last 
year’s budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So before patting themselves on the back and saying, good job, 
job well done; before patting themselves on the back and 
saying, job well done, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think these are 
some pieces that they should be looking at. And of course, we 
want Saskatchewan to be the best place to live for the residents 
here. And these are some key concerns that we are hearing out 
on doorsteps, and I’ve been out on doorsteps quite a bit lately, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, out in Regina Northeast. I’ve heard these 
concerns from folks. And of course, I am also the product of a 
by-election — my very presence here, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
and was out pounding the doorsteps with a number of folks on 
this side last summer. And we heard these concerns from folks 
right in Saskatoon as well. So, right across the province, lots of 
concerns. 
 
So rather than patting themselves on the back, they should be 
looking at the ways that suffering still exists. And we all have 
these stories that exist in our family as well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I am not unlike many folks in this Assembly, 
probably, who have stories of folks who I know and am really 
close to who have suffered as a result of some of these 
shortages, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I don’t have much time here today, so I won’t provide a 
full personal account of these situations, but in the past couple 



4332 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2018 

years I witnessed my grandfather — who I was quite close to 
and lived with for a period of five years — I witnessed him be 
diagnosed very late in the game with pancreatic cancer, which 
we know is often terminal in those situations. We witnessed his 
health deteriorate quite rapidly over the course of a year, no 
ability to enter long-term care until he was in his final days. He 
was worried about the cost of private care. He was saying 
things to us like, I don’t want to live very long because I’m 
concerned about the costs that I’m paying every month for 
private care. So when we have a health care system that can’t 
look after some of our most vulnerable in what is a crucial time 
for them and their families, that’s incredibly disappointing, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
[11:15] 
 
And then my father was in an emergency room a few weeks 
ago, keeled over in pain, and didn’t get help for hours and hours 
and hours. And the response that he was given was, go talk to a 
politician, when he complained about the amount of time that 
he had spent there. So just some concerning situations right 
now. Not sure if we’re at the stage where folks should be 
patting themselves on the back. 
 
And I’m happy to continue to talk about the Sask Party 
government’s record on health. We’ve heard concerns about 
their record for years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of the 
money spent on lean consultants. You know, I understand that 
lean can be quite the efficient program if you’re in the supply 
chain management business, if you’re looking to streamline 
your business, but as soon as you start treating health care 
patients like cars on an assembly line, we heard nothing but 
negative comments about the use of this process and the money 
that was put into this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We’ve heard from communities that feel abandoned by the Sask 
Party, that they raised their own money for a health care centre 
and then were abandoned by the Sask Party. We’ve heard 
concerns from health care workers who put in 24-hour shifts or 
stay after work to care for their patients. We have concerns that 
eliminating the 12 health regions in this province will mean that 
front-line workers no longer have input in the care that’s 
provided at the local level, and this is rich considering the Sask 
Party has consistently attacked former governments for 
streamlining health care. And after a decade of unprecedented 
revenues, the people of this province are being asked to pay for 
these shortcomings, this mismanagement, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And if they had such a strong record on health care, why would 
we have SEIU-West [Service Employees International 
Union-West] rallying on the steps of this legislature back in 
October of this year at the start-up of this Assembly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, talking about reversing the cuts to health care? 
We trust these folks on the front lines, and why would we be 
asking them for a wage cut of 3.5 per cent, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? Just a shameful record on health care. I find it quite 
appalling that the government would come forward with a 
motion like this that is self-congratulatory and expect us to 
support it. 
 
And so we still face a number of these challenges, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We face challenges that some of my colleagues will 
get into about mental health care in this province. We had an 

entire 75-minute debate about mental health care in this 
province. Mental health is health, and we need to be affording it 
that attention. The high cost of prescriptions, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, disproportionally impacting seniors; surgery wait 
times; wait times when you’re sitting in an emergency room; to 
see a specialist, Mr. Deputy Speaker; and the children’s hospital 
being off track, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and I’ll let my 
colleagues provide more information on that, but these are all 
the areas that we’re talking about. I’ve got plenty. I’m just 
running out of time on the clock here. 
 
I cannot support the motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for a number 
of the reasons I’ve identified here. We can’t be patting 
ourselves on the back at this time. We need to do better and we 
need to strive for a better Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think in 
order to understand the importance of supporting such a motion, 
we need to first take a brief look back at where health care in 
regards to physicians and surgeons was in this province prior to 
2007. And only then can we truly comprehend, acknowledge, 
recognize, and yes, even celebrate, the great work this 
government has done and committed to in finding innovative 
solutions to improving health care in this province. 
 
Recruiting and retaining physicians and nurses — the most 
valuable people on our health care system — is crucial to 
sustaining a healthy, viable, and efficient health care system 
that can provide the very best quality, professional, caring 
services to patients. 
 
Mr. Speaker, prior to 2007 and under the NDP, our doctors and 
nurses who were graduating out of our institutions were leaving 
the province to find work elsewhere. Between 2001 and 2006, 
we lost 450 nurses and 173 doctors. The closure of 52 hospitals 
and 1,200 long-term care beds most certainly didn’t help these 
new graduates. Mr. Speaker, you can’t provide health care or 
hire doctors and nurses when they don’t even have a hospital or 
a care home to go to work to each day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, growing the population of Saskatchewan was one 
of our goals, and we did it — something the NDP also didn’t 
believe was possible. This has been a tremendous help to our 
economy, but it also puts more pressure on our health care 
system, so we needed to address that and we have. We heard 
the cry for physicians and nurses, and came up with some 
creative and innovative solutions to recruiting and retaining 
doctors and nurses in this province. 
 
SIPPA, Saskatchewan international physician practice 
assessment program, was a made-in-Saskatchewan solution 
which supports and continues to support the recruitment of 
more physicians to our province by assessing foreign-trained 
family physicians from a broad range of countries. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, of the 200 doctors who have gone through 
SIPPA, 154 of these are practising in a rural or remote 
community. 
 
The establishment of our Saskdocs website in 2007 has also 
assisted in the recruitment of more than 200 international 



May 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4333 

doctors. 
 
The 2017 winter cohort under SIPPA ended April 20th with 12 
candidates successfully completing their assessment and are 
expected to establish their practices by the end of May. The 
2018 spring cohort began on April 26th with 12 candidates 
again, and they will begin their 12-week centralized field 
assessment on May 14th, which was this past Monday, and 
results are expected by mid-August. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as physicians retire or leave communities, those 
positions need to be filled, not close the hospital or health 
facility, and SIPPA candidates are essential to filling these 
positions and are welcomed with open arms into our 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also recognize that we need to grow our own 
physicians here in Saskatchewan. We added 40 seats to the 
College of Medicine, going from 60 to 100, and doubled the 
number of residency positions from 60 to 120. We expanded the 
distribution of post-graduate medical education to Prince 
Albert, Swift Current, La Ronge, North Battleford, and Moose 
Jaw, and further plans are in development for additional sites. 
Of note, Mr. Speaker, 100 per cent of the medical residents in 
the 2017 graduating classes from Swift Current and Moose Jaw 
decided to stay and practise in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have worked with many of our physicians to develop 
collaborative emergency centres, or CECs as we call them, to 
improve access to health care in rural and remote communities, 
and they are designed to provide 24-7 care to help stabilize and 
improve access to primary health care and emergency services. 
 
Saskatchewan has opened three CECs: one in September 2013 
in Maidstone; one in November 2013 in Shaunavon; and one in 
Canora in July 2014. Additional CECs are being implemented 
in Wakaw and Spiritwood. As of March 2017 over 4,000 
patients have been served through CECs and 77 per cent have 
been able to stay in the community rather than transfer to 
another hospital. 
 
Since 2013 our government has been working with specialists 
to implement the provincial referral model. And this model has 
led to significant improvements and continues as a model of 
care that we intend to further expand into other specialists. Mr. 
Speaker, this model has allowed for pooled referrals that level 
workloads for specialists, but more importantly speeds up a 
patient’s wait time to see a specialist. And so far there are 21 
specialty groups and 100 specialists who have signed up. 
 
We also recognized, in order to recruit and retain physicians, we 
needed to offer competitive salaries. And we now have the 
second-highest compensation for doctors and particularly 
specialists, in the country, and it is well above the Canadian 
average. This has allowed us to recruit 487 new specialists since 
2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my son graduated from the College of Medicine at 
the U of S in 2007. He did not get a residency spot here but was 
given one at the Vancouver hospital in radiology and diagnostic 
imaging. Being a true Saskatchewan rural kid, he always 
wanted to come back. So after passing his Royal College exams 
as an interventional radiologist and becoming American board 

certified as well, and getting married — yes, pretty much all at 
the same time and within a couple of months of each other — in 
2012, he and his bride moved back to Lloydminster where he 
accepted a job with Prairie North Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this young man had dreams and ambitions and 
with the support and help of his parents, a year later built and 
opened his own diagnostic imaging clinic while continuing to 
work for the health region. Since then he has reinvested in 
supporting the improvement of health care and wait times in 
this province. He has built another imaging clinic in 
Lloydminster and has built and opened ultrasound clinics in 
North Battleford, Meadow Lake, Weyburn, Swift Current, and 
recently Estevan. 
 
His investment into the people of this province has greatly 
reduced the load on health regions, but more importantly has 
greatly reduced wait times for these patients and has removed 
the worry and stress for them in getting in for an appointment 
and getting their test results sooner. 
 
With this government’s commitment to finding innovative 
solutions to improving health care, the connecting of the PACS, 
or picture archiving communication system, across this 
province allows specialists to do reads, particularly with 
ultrasounds, no matter where they are located in the province — 
actually no matter where they are in the world, as long as they 
have the connectivity. And it has significantly lessened the wait 
times for patients anxiously awaiting test results and diagnosis. 
Advancing patient care is the number one priority in all of these 
innovations. 
 
I am so proud of my son for being one of those doctors and 
specialists contributing to the improvement of health care in this 
province. Mr. Speaker, there are nearly 900 more physicians 
now practising in this province compared to 2007, a 51 per cent 
increase overall, with a 62 per cent increase in specialists, a 43 
per cent increase in general practitioners, and a 98 per cent 
increase in pediatricians. And yes, we will continue to recruit 
more. 
 
So let’s talk about 3,700 more nurses. Yes, that’s 3,700 more 
nurses providing care and services in this province since 2007. 
In total, more than 16,000 nurses are licensed to practise in the 
province, including registered nurses, registered psychiatric 
nurses, nurse practitioners, and licensed practical nurses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, back in 2004 I remember stepping into an elevator 
at the Sheraton Cavalier in Saskatoon and noted the name tags 
on the four other people already in the elevator. As the doors 
closed I commented on their ID [identification] and asked what 
brought them to our province from the great state of Texas. And 
lo and behold, they had a room set up at the hotel and were 
recruiting nurses. Such a shame to lose those nurses. 
 
The then Health minister, Len Taylor, stated in the Leader-Post 
in March of 2006, “More nurses, but less than 600.” There’s no 
light at the end of the tunnel unless it’s a train. These staffing 
levels are dangerous.  
 
So what did they do, Mr. Speaker? Instead of recruiting, they 
closed 52 hospitals and 1,200 long-term care beds and put 
nurses out of work. 



4334 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2018 

Mr. Speaker, unlike the NDP, our government has shown a 
strong commitment to recruiting and retaining nurses in 
Saskatchewan over the decade. And, Mr. Speaker, we will 
continue to ensure that these levels of valued caregivers 
continue to support our ever-growing and evolving health care 
system. 
 
We can never go back to the weak leadership of the NDP and 
the lack of respect and care they showed for the health of the 
people of Saskatchewan. We will continue to stand up for the 
health care of the people in this province and find ways to 
support their needs. I do support the motion put forward by the 
member from Biggar-Sask Valley. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And as 
always, great pleasure to enter into the debate here on the 
75-minute debate on Thursday, private members’ day. I don’t 
know how many more we’ll have this session, so I’m really 
happy to be able to enter into the debate. 
 
The member for Biggar-Sask Valley was talking about the 
number of nurses that have been hired. I know that when you 
look at SUN’s [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] records, in the 
last 10 years there is 1,000 nurses that have been hired. We 
don’t have the numbers on LPNs, but I think it would be helpful 
to get that number too because if you say 3,700, really you 
could say that as far as registered nurses the number is actually 
1,000. And I think that’s something that needs to be looked at, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Now it’s interesting when you see the Sask Party crowing and 
bragging about the things they’ve done. And I have to quote 
one of our press gallery here, the new president of the 
Saskatchewan Press Gallery Association actually. Yes, Mr. 
David Fraser. And he pointed out in his . . . He has the running 
article called “Under the Dome.” And this is one that came out 
recently in May. And he pointed out in there, the government 
propaganda they send out as news releases. 
 
And I think that’s what this motion is as well, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
more this crowing and bragging, and this government has a 
habit of doing that. And what David Fraser said: 
 

The premier’s office sent out a press release bragging 
about the increase in the number of nurses in the province 
under a Saskatchewan Party government. In another 
instance, it was bragging about the number of doctors hired 
since coming into power.  
 
[This is David Fraser. I’m quoting him.] I told the 
premier’s press secretary this and will share it here again: 
that is not news, it’s propaganda.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, so when you have the Chair of the Saskatchewan 
Press Gallery Association, president, pointing that out — and 
congratulations to him for his new appointment, and again, I 
guess, thanks to Karen Briere for carrying that role for so many 
years — I think this government needs to pay attention to what 

the press is observing about their propaganda. 
 
And yet again we see it here in the 75-minute debate, Mr. 
Speaker. Are there not better things that we could debate about 
instead of just arguing about government propaganda? I mean, 
the 75-minute debate is an opportunity to engage in real, 
meaningful discussions about things like mental health, Mr. 
Speaker, which we did last week. But now we see more of the 
propaganda spin machine putting it out. And I think it’s 
something that we need to be really concerned about. 
 
Now when I first got elected, this was back in 2011, November 
of 2011, and I think the Sask Party had this Health minister that 
was very, very engaged in the surgical wait times initiative. 
And I have a quote here from . . . I think this is . . . I want to 
find the right one. 2012. So it was shortly after I got elected and 
I was just getting my feet wet here in the House. This is another 
press release from the Saskatchewan Government and this was 
January 13th, 2012. And what were they saying at that time, 
Mr. Speaker? They were talking about health care, and they had 
a very able Health minister at the time, the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. He was very vocal and very determined to talk 
about surgical wait times.  
 
I remember him in the House often and I think you’ll remember 
too, Mr. Speaker, that Health minister really made a real effort 
to get that issue out in front and centre. He did have some 
results too, Mr. Speaker. There was a number of millions of 
dollars invested in those surgical wait times. So he delivered. 
He delivered. He was a very capable cabinet minister, and he 
got the job done, Mr. Speaker. They promised that all people 
would have access to a specialist and diagnostics within one 
week. So in addition to reducing surgical wait times, there was 
a promise made by this government that all . . . I’m going to say 
this again. It’s a quote from their press release: “. . . all people 
will have access to a specialist and diagnostics within one 
week.” 
 
That’s a great promise, Mr. Speaker, and I think the people of 
Saskatchewan kind of liked it. And that Health minister was 
going to deliver on it. When he talked about these surgical 
initiatives he said . . . This is from May 2nd, 2012 so, again 
shortly after I got elected. I know he was up in the House on a 
regular basis when he was on the front bench there, and here’s 
what he said, “We’re proud of the progress made so far on our 
ambitious but attainable goal of providing sooner, safer, smarter 
care for patients.” And that was the quote he made, and I think 
he was really intent on delivering it. 
 
Then we had . . . The member from Weyburn took over from 
him and I think things kind of flatlined at that point in time. We 
didn’t see any further progress, and he certainly didn’t talk 
about it the way the member from Indian Head-Milestone did, 
Mr. Speaker. I mean it was just, all of a sudden it kind of went 
quiet. 
 
And then we got a new Health minister, the guy, the member 
from Rosetown, Mr. Speaker. And mum’s the word. We’re not 
hearing anything anymore about surgical wait times or access to 
specialists, in fact to the point, Mr. Speaker, where we’ve had to 
actually ask questions in the House about what’s going on 
because they’re not talking about it anymore. And you’ve got to 
wonder why. 



May 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4335 

There was some statistics that we presented to the government 
and asked them, why aren’t you talking about this? And here’s 
what we found out: in less than three years the number of 
people waiting more than three months for their surgery has 
grown by over 7,000 people, Mr. Speaker. Now it’s no wonder 
the current Health minister isn’t talking about this anymore. 
Perhaps they should consult with the former Health minister to 
find out how he got the job done. And all of a sudden it’s not 
happening anymore, Mr. Speaker. If you look at that number, 
7,000 people, that’s over five times as many people than were 
waiting in 2015 — three years ago — five times more people 
are waiting more than three months for their surgery. 
 
So all of that big talk from 2011, 2012 and of course, you know, 
the member from Estevan when he was the minister for Health, 
he didn’t talk a whole lot about surgical wait times . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh sorry, Weyburn. I apologize, Mr. 
Speaker. That is not very nice of me. And I was in Estevan a 
couple of weeks ago for a meeting with New Democrats and it’s 
a lovely town. And I’m sure the minister, the member for 
Estevan, when he was Health minister was kind of quiet about 
surgical wait times. We didn’t hear a whole lot from him. So 
maybe he stopped consulting with the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone, who made such great advances in surgical wait 
times and invested money in it, Mr. Speaker. And now the 
member from Rosetown, he’s not even . . . We don’t hear a 
whole lot about what he has to say about it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, 2,500 more people are now waiting more than 
six months for their surgery. They’re going the wrong way. Mr. 
Speaker, we don’t see any of this in their propaganda news 
releases, and we certainly don’t see it in the motions they bring 
forward for debate here in the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we saw that there was a report that saw 
Saskatchewan fall desperately short on surgery waits compared 
to other provinces. You know, back in 2012, the member for 
Indian Head-Milestone was bragging how Saskatchewan was 
ahead of the game, that it was ahead of other provinces, and 
proud of that, Mr. Speaker. And how much they’ve fallen, Mr. 
Speaker. Like this is, this is a desperate situation for the people 
of Saskatchewan, and we see that this government is not 
capitalizing on the hard work of the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone and the accomplishments that he made, Mr. 
Speaker. And now we see subsequent Health ministers not 
continuing that curve, in fact it’s going the other way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two years ago Saskatchewan was at 100 per cent 
of the benchmark for hip replacements, and now what is it at? 
Slid to 76 per cent. That’s a whole quarter, 25 per cent that it 
slid. For a knee replacements, Mr. Speaker, the province was at 
99 per cent of the benchmark, and in only two short years that’s 
gone down to 61 per cent. So, Mr. Speaker, we’re falling below 
the national average on several benchmarks just on surgical 
wait times. 
 
The other issue, of course, and we raised it here in the House, 
and we talked about it last week in our debate on mental health 
which is an important and critical part of our system, and there 
we found out that children who need psychological support are 
stuck on waiting lists for years. And we know, with the suicide 
crisis that we have occurring in our province, in the North in 
particular, it’s impacting other areas. And we have our surgical 

. . . our counsellors and psychologists and they’re identifying 
these lengthy, lengthy wait times. We see lack of services for 
children who are suffering from mental illness, and those are 
things that we don’t see in the government propaganda for 
obvious reasons, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we need this Health minister and we need this government 
to take the surgical wait times, the regression in all the hard 
work that was done when the minister or the member from 
Indian Head-Milestone was the minister of Health when I first 
got elected . . . That’s all gone by the wayside, Mr. Speaker. 
And for them to be crowing about the propaganda that they 
presented in the 75-minute debate doesn’t do service to the 
children who are on the wait-list, to the seniors who are waiting 
for hips and knees, and to all the folks in Saskatchewan who 
want to see better delivery of health care services for them and 
their families, Mr. Speaker. So I won’t be supporting the motion 
— surprise, surprise. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to stand in front 
of you, this government, and the people of Saskatchewan to 
speak on health care within the province, specifically my 
support on the government’s role in continuing to create 
innovative solutions to recruiting and retaining physicians and 
nurses in rural and remote areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has been a leader in the field of 
health care since we took office in 2007. Our government has 
shown that not only does urban care centres benefit, but also 
those in rural and remote areas in this province. Mr. Speaker, 
we have made significant improvements towards creating 
facilities, providing innovative services, and recruiting health 
care professionals throughout the rural and remote areas of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has implemented collaborative 
emergency centres to provide services in communities such as 
Shaunavon, Canora, and Maidstone. This collaborative 
emergency centres provide 24-7 care to their communities, 
helping improve and stabilize primary health care and 
emergency services in rural communities. Since March 2017 
over 4,000 patients have been seen at these collaborative 
emergency centres, with 77 per cent of them being able to have 
their care provided at local clinics rather than being transferred 
to other clinics or hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the area of physician recruitment for our 
province the numbers speak for themselves. There was a 51 per 
cent increase in physicians from the previous government’s 
time in office. That’s nearly 900 more licensed physicians. It’s 
not only physicians. Since 2007 the numbers of specialists in 
Saskatchewan have grown up by 62 per cent. 
 
Looking more specifically at rural and remote physician 
recruitment, there is no shortage of programs aimed to ensure 
citizens have access to health care professionals in their 
communities. It started with increasing the number of available 
seats at the College of Medicine from 60 to 100 and doubling 
the number of medical resident seats. Our government has also 
expanded the distribution of post-graduate medical education to 



4336 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2018 

Swift Current, Moose Jaw, North Battleford, La Ronge, and 
Prince Albert. Mr. Speaker, 100 per cent of the medical 
residents in the 2017 graduating classes from Swift Current and 
Moose Jaw stayed and are practising right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — In Moose Jaw? 
 
Mr. Steele: — Right in Moose Jaw. 
 
Over 200 doctors from abroad have been assessed, passed, and 
recruited through the assistance of Saskdocs and are working 
throughout the province. One hundred and fifty-four of these 
doctors are practising in rural and remote communities. This 
made it even more incredible by the fact that nearly 77 per cent 
of the international physicians’ practices are located in rural and 
regional communities of Saskatchewan. 
 
Recruitment of these talented and skilled health care 
professionals is not only the thing that this government has 
done to support rural and remote health. Mr. Speaker, it’s not 
just doctors that we have seen an increase in. There are more 
than 16,000 nurses working in Saskatchewan. An increase of 29 
per cent since 2007 shows that there are 3,700 more nurses 
calling Saskatchewan their home. 
 
Nurses are vital in their role in the health care system. No other 
health care professional has as versatile of a role in health care. 
They educate their patients. They assist in providing care and 
assist in cure. They support the care, help to assist patients on 
the road to recovery and rehabilitation. 
 
We have made huge strides since 2007. Our government has 
continued to work hard, increasing the number of health care 
practitioners across the province, allowing us to provide levels 
of health care services in our rural and remote communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital as of 
February 2018 is approximately 80 per cent complete and is set 
to open its doors in 2019. Our government’s strong 
commitment to recruiting physicians and nurses, and we are on 
track to hit our recruitment targets for the Jim Pattison 
Children’s Hospital when it opens. The children’s hospital will 
be fully staffed with 70 FTE [full-time equivalent] positions 
projected for pediatricians with 20 specialities. 
 
We have already recruited 52 FTE pediatricians for the Jim 
Pattison Children’s Hospital, and all currently working in 
Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, our province has seen a 79 per cent 
increase in pediatricians practising in Saskatchewan since 2007. 
Saskatchewan has the second-highest compensation rates for 
specialties per specialist in the country, allowing us to recruit 
487 new specialists since 2007, an increase of 62 cent. 
 
[11:45] 
 
Our government has been working with specialists to 
implement a provincial referral model. The provincial referral 
model has aspects that will lead to significant improvements 
and continues to ensure that there is a model of care that will 
attend to future expanded into our specialities. Mr. Speaker, the 
pooled referrals level off the workloads for specialists, and 
allows the patients to be seen by the next available specialist. 

One hundred specialists in 21 specialty groups have signed up 
to be part of the provincial referral model. They have seen a 
wait time reduction ranging from 40 to 80 per cent with the help 
of the provincial referral model. The model also standardized 
referral forms, consult letters, to ensure that all the information 
is given to the specialist and referring general practitioners, and 
nothing gets missed. The model will coordinate diagnostics test 
to ensure that the lab and the imaging results automatically 
accompany referrals to specialists. Specialized assessments and 
triage ensures that patients are seen according to their needs. 
 
Currently the provincial referral model is being implemented in 
Saskatoon’s children to improve wait times for patients. They 
are working to establish a centralized intake, standardized 
assessment, and triage by teams that include Saskatoon mental 
health services. We expect that this work will be completed by 
the fall of 2018. The minister continues to work with the 
specialists who are willing to implement pooled referrals and 
other aspects to the provincial referral model into their practice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the continued diligent work done by 
this government since 2007, our government has kept our 
promise to continue to show strong commitment to create 
innovative solutions to recruit and retain physicians and nurses 
in our rural and remote communities in Saskatchewan. I would 
like to make the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly support the continuing efforts of 
government to continue their ongoing efforts to recruit 
physicians and nurses and to stabilize hospital services in 
rural and remote communities. 

 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to enter into 
the discussion here this afternoon around health care in 
Saskatchewan, around mental health care in Saskatchewan. 
What’s disappointing is that what we see again from this Sask 
Party government is a government unwilling to recognize the 
reality that communities face all across our province, and all too 
willing to boast and promote and pat themselves on the back, 
Mr. Speaker. And I think that many of the families and 
communities that members opposite represent would be very 
disappointed with this approach, an approach that dismisses the 
real challenges that people and patients face all across our 
province. 
 
The people are looking for the health care that they need and 
deserve — are looking for, Mr. Speaker — but instead we see a 
Sask Party frankly that’s far more interested in self-promotion 
and self-interest, Mr. Speaker, from a partisan sense and not the 
public’s interest, Mr. Speaker. And I think that folks in through 
. . . well the reality would be every corner of our province, 
would be disappointed with this approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think of those all through the Southeast in Estevan and 
Carlyle and Arcola and that region, Mr. Speaker, that work so 
hard to attract and to retain medical professionals and doctors, 
Mr. Speaker, to make sure that they have the services that give 
them the peace of mind and security that they deserve. They’d 



May 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4337 

be so disappointed to see this sort of approach by the Sask 
Party. 
 
I know folks all through the east side of the province, I think 
right up in around Yorkton . . . We’ve got the two ministers, 
Mr. Speaker. Now of course we’re paying two ministers of 
Health in this province, Mr. Speaker, and they’re failing to get 
the job done. We have a minister who is supposedly 
representing matters of rural and remote health, Mr. Speaker, 
but certainly his actions wouldn’t demonstrate a commitment to 
making sure that rural people and remote communities have the 
access that they deserve to rural and remote health care. 
 
And I think of communities like Preeceville, Mr. Speaker, not 
far from where that one minister, Mr. Speaker, who collects a 
paycheque for Rural and Remote Health, Mr. Speaker, resides. 
And I think of Preeceville, Mr. Speaker. That community of 
Preeceville, a proud community, Mr. Speaker, worked hard to 
come together with health committees and fundraisers to build a 
hospital, Mr. Speaker, a beautiful facility that they opened the 
doors to, to serve the community today and for generations. 
That was the hope, Mr. Speaker. And they raised dollars and 
they brought people together. 
 
And shortly after the last election, only weeks after the last 
election, the Sask Party then closed the emergency room to that 
hospital. They closed the function, a very important function of 
that hospital, Mr. Speaker. And that time actually coincided 
with the time that that hard-working community was actually 
having a celebration of paying off that project, of burning the 
mortgage if you will, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But of course the candidate in the area that had run through that 
period of time didn’t tell Preeceville that that was on offer by 
the Sask Party. Of course the premier at the time wasn’t straight 
with the people of Preeceville on this front. No. They ran an 
election, Mr. Speaker, pretended they were going to be 
committed to rural health care, then of course we see the exact 
opposite. 
 
And I know it’s people like those in Preeceville that are feeling 
particularly betrayed by the actions of this government. And it’s 
this sort of motion, the self-congratulatory, boasting motion 
that’s far more about political self-interest, Mr. Speaker, than 
the public’s interest, that really turns people off. 
 
You know, and I’ve been out to Preeceville, along with our 
team, multiple times to listen to the good people on this front. I 
was out there, I recall, just after that last election. It was a warm 
July day, Mr. Speaker. The community was gathering in the hall 
and had asked for representation. Of course they had asked for 
one of the two Health ministers as well. Of course one is just up 
the road in Yorkton. Should have been a short commute for 
him. Of course the MLA for the area, you’d anticipate would be 
there at the meeting, Mr. Speaker, to speak to his constituents 
on an issue that was very important to them. But none of that 
was the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I entered the room that night. Hundreds of people, good 
people from the region that are committed to that hospital were 
there, but no local MLA. Not an MLA in sight, Mr. Speaker, 
from the Sask Party. Not the MLA, not the premier who had 
been invited, not the Health minister from Weyburn, Mr. 

Speaker, and not the other Health minister from Yorkton, a 
short commute up the road. And this is the kind of treatment 
that Saskatchewan people in rural and remote communities are 
growing accustomed to. 
 
We see that same sort of glossing over and dismissal of the 
reality impacting communities like Tisdale and La Ronge, Mr. 
Speaker. We see it in every corner of the province. We see a 
government that is failing to recognize the incredible crisis that 
we face when it comes to mental health and addictions services 
in this province, a failure to recognize that far too many people 
in our province are suffering in silence, far too many people 
being left without the services and supports that they need when 
they ask for help, Mr. Speaker. And we’re leaving people and 
families and kids all across our community in very vulnerable 
situations. We’re placing them at risk because of the failure to 
recognize and act on the crisis that is mental health and 
addictions services in our province today. 
 
But do we see the members opposite, the Sask Party, the 
governing Sask Party and their big majority, get up to speak to 
that important issue which touches every community in this 
province, which touches rural communities in our province in a 
significant way? No, nada. We see a government get up and to 
back-pat themselves and boast in a political, partisan sense 
instead of serving the best interests of the people of the 
province and the public interest of the people of our province. 
 
We’ve watched a government that’s gone completely 
backwards on surgical wait-lists, Mr. Speaker, at once a 
government that was newly elected and making headway. I can 
recall the minister at the time, the minister of Health, the 
member from Indian Head, Mr. Speaker. It would appear that 
he took that issue seriously. I saw him take to the floor in this 
Assembly and proudly speak to the investment and the action 
that they were having around surgical wait-lists, Mr. Speaker, 
and the numbers were coming down. You know, there was 
some debate about how that was going on, Mr. Speaker, but the 
numbers were coming down. 
 
And that was the record under that Health minister, Mr. 
Speaker. And it sort of speaks to what we see in the Sask Party, 
once maybe focused on delivering their promises and serving 
the people, but falling offside of that agenda, Mr. Speaker, over 
that long period, Mr. Speaker, and that big majority. We saw a 
new Health minister come in, the member from Weyburn, and 
these numbers sort of flatlined at that time, Mr. Speaker, and we 
didn’t see the progress that people were looking for. We saw 
them falling far short of that commitment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We saw them falling far short as well of being able to address 
emergency room wait times, Mr. Speaker. In fact, here in the 
city of Regina, Mr. Speaker, at the Pasqua Hospital, we saw a 
government that could barely keep that emergency room 
operating, that left that critical emergency room at risk for the 
people of our province. 
 
And then of course we’ve watched this latest iteration of the 
Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, one that ran on one agenda and is 
doing something completely different, one that’s focused on 
their own political interests ahead of the best interests of 
Saskatchewan people, and in that iteration we see a government 
going backwards. We see the minister, now the member from 



4338 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2018 

Rosetown, and the second minister, the two paycheques that are 
being collected for this portfolio, Mr. Speaker, walking surgical 
wait times absolutely backwards, Mr. Speaker. So any touted 
gains that had been made up by the minister for Indian Head in 
working with the health system and then flatlined of course 
under the member from Weyburn have gone . . . are now 
skyrocketing once again, being reversed, Mr. Speaker, by the 
failure to act, Mr. Speaker, by the current Minister of Health. 
 
Saskatchewan people are proud of the system that we’ve built. 
We need to work to build a national pharmacare system within 
our province to make sure our system is as effective and as 
efficient as it can be, to make sure that people are as healthy as 
they can be, and that they’d receive the prescriptions that they 
deserve. We need to prioritize and act on mental health and 
addictions services all across our province. We need to make 
sure that we have primary health available to all the people of 
the province, Mr. Speaker. That’s the commitment of the 
Saskatchewan New Democrats, the official opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, and I know that’s what Saskatchewan people want to 
see. 
 
And to all those health care workers, to all those professionals 
across our province, I say thank you. Thank you for what you 
do in this system. Thank you for what you do amidst the weak 
leadership that we see from the Sask Party, the resources that 
are being starved from the front lines. And to all those people 
working in emergency services through all aspects of health 
care, I say, keep doing what you’re doing; we need you. And 
let’s work together to build this system that we’re so proud of in 
Saskatchewan. And obviously I don’t support the 
self-congratulatory motion of the Sask Party government. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I only have a few seconds, unfortunately, 
but I did want to correct the member opposite who was talking 
about Preeceville and the issue around the emergency room. I 
mean he’s talking about the Preeceville Hospital that was 
announced for seven years under the NDP and never was built 
but was built within the first couple of years of the Sask Party 
government. Is he talking about that Preeceville Hospital, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can understand they would like to expand into 
wait times and everything else, but the motion talks about 
physician recruitment and nurse recruitment. Even the NDP 
should be able to congratulate a government that has expanded 
the recruitment of nurses and physicians in this province, that 
this province has never seen any other party do, Mr. Speaker — 
something to be proud of. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 
claims to want to do better with seniors’ care, but we have the 
lowest per capita geriatricians in the country. Does the member 
for Cypress Hills think this is enough? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 

Mr. Steele: — Yes, of course. Well we’re recruiting. You see 
the numbers of nurses that we’ve brought in since we’ve taken 
power can speak for itself. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 
recently the opposition seemed to have been trying to position 
themselves as a party for health care reform. Their leader even 
came up to the wonderful constituency of Carrot River Valley 
and was talking about it. But when you examine the records of 
both parties, you see how ridiculous their plan is. 
 
In this government’s time on this side of the House we’ve 
increased nurses by 29 per cent, doctors by 51 per cent, 
shortened wait times drastically, and built new hospitals, 
including the children’s hospital. 
 
[12:00] 
 
Think of what happened under the NDP. The members opposite 
closed 52 hospitals, understaffed them, and had among the 
longest wait times in all of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this question’s for the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana: how can you possibly think the public will believe your 
rhetoric on this file, given your record? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — It’s more than humorous that you have a 
member from that side getting up asking about rhetoric when 
we see the press critiquing them for all the propaganda that 
they’re putting out. And this entire question is exactly that. It’s 
propaganda, Mr. Speaker, and self-congratulations. 
 
What I wish we could see is, again, a minister like the one from 
Indian Head-Milestone who actually made actual progress in 
reducing wait times. And then since then, you know, we haven’t 
seen that progress. The people of Saskatchewan deserve better. 
And instead of putting silly, rhetorical, propagandistic questions 
in the 75-minute debate, Mr. Speaker, perhaps they should 
focus some energy on those surgical wait times. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question is to the 
member for Cypress Hills. Does he think it’s acceptable that 
children are waiting up to two years to see a child psychiatrist? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — That’s a good question, and of course not. We’re 
working on it with the children’s hospital in Saskatoon being 
and next year, 2019, is going to be open. Hopefully we can take 
care of a lot of those services that need to be delivered. Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



May 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4339 

Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m curious 
to know, does the member for Biggar-Sask Valley think his 
government should be bragging about historical numbers when 
we are currently off track to staff the children’s hospital? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Biggar-Sask Valley. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you for the question. Well I think it’s 
very important to go back and look at the record of the former 
NDP government. As I said in my comments, you know, 
Saskatchewan under the NDP lost 450 nurses, 173 doctors. 
Between 2001 and 2006, you know, they had the longest 
surgical wait times in Canada. The NDP closed 52 hospitals and 
the Plains hospital. 
 
And look at our Saskatchewan Party record as in government. 
We added more than 900 doctors, over 3,700 more nurses. We 
are among the shortest surgical wait times in Canada, and we’ve 
doubled the investment in hospital projects, including the 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon, the new hospitals in Moose 
Jaw and North Battleford. 
 
Is there more to be done? Yes, but we are doing a great job 
compared to any other jurisdiction in Canada, and especially to 
the NDP record in the past. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Goudy: — When the party across was in power, they kept 
our nurses across the province feeling hopeless. Staggeringly 
low staffing levels, excessive workloads, and no guarantee of 
positive recruitment strategies was their reality. From 2001 to 
2006, the province lost 450 nurses and 173 doctors. Since our 
government took power in 2007, the number of RNs is up 27 
per cent, LPNs, 48 per cent, and nurse practitioners is up 126 
per cent. 
 
So to the member from Saskatoon Nutana: why wasn’t 
recruitment and training for hard-working nurses across 
Saskatchewan a priority of your government when you were in 
power? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this government has had record 
revenues for the past decade and what we see is an inability to 
use that money properly and actually make progress in surgical 
wait times here in Saskatchewan. They’re going backwards, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And if you looked at any of the news stories . . . I saw one just 
the other day about burnout. Nurses’ burnout is incredible in the 
province right now. We have incredible overtime. We have jobs 
not being filled. And so I think the front-line medical staff 
would tell the member opposite a different story. 
 
And what I think we need to see from this government is, rather 
than using propaganda to pat themselves on the back, that they 

show the people of Saskatchewan that they care about those 
front-line workers and about the care people are getting. And so 
that would be an important thing for them to focus on rather 
than questions like this in 75-minute debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Speaking of 
nurses in Saskatchewan, doctors and nurses in Saskatchewan 
have — and across the country — have called for a national 
pharmacare program. It’s estimated that about 700,000 
Canadians skip groceries to pay for prescription medications 
and upwards of 240,000 skimp on heat to pay for drugs. To the 
member from Lloydminster: does she think it’s right that some 
of her constituents have to choose between food and shelter or 
medication to keep them healthy? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — I thank the member for the question. I’d like her 
to refer back to the motion that’s on the floor though, and that is 
with regards to recruiting nurses and doctors in this province. 
And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our record speaks for itself. 
Year over year, increases to our health care budget, working 
with our nurses and doctors to come up with creative and 
innovative solutions in order to increase those numbers, and 
provide strong, efficient health care services to meet the needs 
of the people in this province. 
 
We have recruited over 3,700 more nurses. We have recruited 
over 900 doctors, 487 of them being specialists in this province. 
We have worked with our physicians to ensure that the 
compensation we are paying them meets the needs and is the 
best . . . one of the best in the country, so we are competitive. 
We are invested in recruiting nurses and doctors in the province 
and to keeping facilities open. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Francis: — Mr. Speaker, the health care record of the 
NDP speaks for itself — physician shortages, overwhelmed and 
overworked nurses, no proper recruitment tools or plans to fix 
the problem, 52 hospitals closed, 1,200 long-term care beds 
eliminated, a true decline in the health care system for 
Saskatchewan families since . . . prior to 2007. 
 
To the member from Saskatoon Nutana: setting aside the 
divided and inconsistent opinions of your leader, can you agree 
that this government’s recruitment efforts in medical services 
have been a contributing factor in the growth of this province 
since 2007? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, when I think about my 
hometown and the hospital and the home care that’s now 
replaced the hospital, I’m so happy that my mother, who’s now 
a level 4 care patient in the Lafleche care home, is receiving 
excellent care in her hometown. And I think that is something 



4340 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2018 

I’m really proud of, that changes that were made for my home 
community and a beautiful new facility, Mr. Speaker. And she’s 
getting excellent care. 
 
And so there are front-line workers that are doing an excellent 
job in our health care system. And we know that they’re 
stressed. We know that they’re burned out. And these are the 
things this government should be focusing on. They’re too 
retrospective. They should be looking forward to ensuring that 
the people of Saskatchewan — and like my mother — are 
getting the care they need, that there aren’t long waiting lists for 
surgery, there aren’t long waiting lists for child psychiatrists, 
Mr. Speaker. And that’s the focus that this government should 
have, rather than what we see the members opposite saying 
today. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for questions has . . . Time for 
the 75-minute debate has expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 606 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Mr. Forbes that Bill No. 606 — The Election 
(Fairness and Accountability) Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I certainly 
appreciate the opportunity to rise today to speak to this bill. I’m 
very proud of the work that our team has put into this bill, the 
dedication of those who have done the research, looked across 
the country at what’s being done in other provinces, and pointed 
out really what is an opportunity for us, a hopeful moment for 
us in this House to right what is wrong with our political system 
right now with our campaign financing laws. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are an outlier across the country, the only 
province with the types of rules that we see with no limits on 
corporate donations, no limits on out-of-province donations, a 
complete free-for-all on individual donations. It’s really, it’s 
really disturbing to see us so outside of the norm. But it’s not a 
new problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s something that has been 
a long-standing problem in this province and in this profession. 
 
Unfortunately we’ve seen that problem further exacerbated in 
recent years. This government has taken what is a long-standing 
practice and really made an art out of pursuing the corporate 
donation. Mr. Speaker, they’ve done so with policies that 
benefit large corporations much more than they benefit the 
people of Saskatchewan. And they’ve done so by travelling off 
to Calgary and other parts of the country, giving speeches, and 
pursuing those political donations. We even saw during the 
Sask Party leadership race, one of their members go to another 
province and have a fundraiser for his Sask Party leadership 
campaign. Mr. Speaker, that’s very strange for someone who’s 

trying to represent the people of this province. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about that practice, 
that practice of pursuing corporate donations and pursuing 
policies that benefit those who donate above the people of the 
province. And it’s a practice that really causes us all a lot of 
damage. And there are numbers to this debate. We talk a lot 
about the number of dollars given, the millions of dollars in 
corporate donations to the Sask Party, millions of those dollars 
coming from out of province. 
 
We talk about the dollars that people pay to attend 
cash-for-access events to have greater access to ministers. We 
talk about the number of contracts that have been granted to 
companies that donate to the government. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we have of course the numbered companies, the numbered 
companies that won’t even declare what it is their business is 
but they’re happy to declare their support for the Sask Party, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the fact of the matter is . . . And to the members opposite, 
the fact of the matter is, this is not a question of numbers. It’s 
not a question of numbers. It’s a question of trust. It’s a 
question of trust. Do people look at us when we’re here in our 
desks and when we’re out in the community, they look at us and 
say, those are people that I trust? We know that we’ve elected 
them to work for our best interests, to do what needs to be done, 
and to go into that work in an objective fashion. 
 
When we’re doing the work that is part of this business, looking 
at how we interact with companies, how we interact with 
different stakeholders, that we’re doing that through an 
objective lens, making sure that we’re working always subject 
to the necessities of the people of the province, that we’re 
keeping in mind what the real purpose of our work here is. 
Because the real purpose of our work is not to make any 
particular company wealthy or any particular sector successful. 
Our work is to make sure that we work for the health and 
well-being of the people of the province. The primary goal of 
what we’re trying to do is to improve the quality of lives of 
everyone in this province. 
 
And I keep coming back to that, that health and well-being, for 
a number of reasons, but one that’s very particular to the debate 
we’re having today. When we talk about the health field — and 
as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m a family physician, and 
so I’ve had a chance to watch the way that this rolls out in that 
particular field — in that field there’s a long-standing practice 
where pharmaceutical companies will come around and offer 
gifts, offer things to the different practices, whether that’s a 
small gift, a pen or a mug or a pad of paper, or whether it is a 
matter of, you know, something larger, inviting them to a 
dinner, a golf event, or even going so far as to have money 
coming in for signing up patients to a study, etc. 
 
All of these things are common practice, long-standing practice. 
And the studies show, Mr. Speaker, that the greater the degree 
of connection, the more that gift is, the more that we see 
influence on the behaviour of people that are prescribing 
medications. And the reality is the studies show that the bigger 
it is, the bigger the impact. But even small things — even that 
cup, even that mug, that pad of paper — makes a difference in 
people’s behaviour. Gifts influence how we think about the 



May 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4341 

relationship that we’re in, Mr. Speaker. Even those small gifts 
influence behaviour, which is no surprise. That’s why they do 
it. 
 
[12:15] 
 
The pharmaceutical companies are not out there handing out 
pens because they want our writing to be nicer, as much as most 
of us in the profession could use that help. Mr. Speaker, they’re 
doing it because it will influence the decisions of the people in 
practice. They’re more likely to prescribe the medications of the 
companies that have given something. Studies show that over 
and over again. And the fact of the matter is, that’s why they do 
it. 
 
And the same is true for the companies that donate to the Sask 
Party. The reason they do it is because they believe it will 
influence the behaviour of the members on the other side. They 
believe that it will result in policies that will benefit their 
business, or in contracts that will benefit their business, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s why they do it. That’s why Cenovus does it. 
That’s why Encana does it. They’re not doing it because they 
love the vision of this party. They’re doing it because they see 
an opportunity to improve their own bottom line. 
 
And you know what? They’re not doing anything wrong, 
because they’re following the rules. The problem is the rules. 
The problem is that we’ve allowed this situation to continue 
where there’s no control whatsoever over who donates. And so 
you can have companies giving an unlimited amount of money, 
collecting contracts, coming back and giving more money, and 
getting more contracts. And that’s completely within the rules. 
But you know what, Mr. Speaker? That does a disservice to this 
province. It does a disservice because the reason those large 
donations are given is to influence our behaviour. 
 
And now we’ve seen a change. We’ve seen in the practice of 
medicine there’s been a real change in the approach to this. That 
profession has looked at that practice of how pharmaceutical 
companies come in with their gifts, and they’ve said, no that’s 
sending us in the wrong direction. We’re going to control that. 
We’re going to decrease the amount of that kind of gift that can 
take place.  
 
And this is in a profession where, you know, it’s one of the 
most trusted professions in the world, up there with the 
pharmacists and the firemen, professions that people really 
trust. But they recognize that trust is their greatest asset. Trust is 
the only capital they really have. If they want to influence their 
patients to make good decisions for their own health, if they 
want to influence public policy to be healthy public policy, they 
need to be perceived as working for the health of patients, not 
for the bottom lines of pharmaceutical companies. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s the reason that that’s a practice that I’ve always 
avoided — avoided those connections with pharmaceutical 
companies myself — and why that profession is going more 
and more down that road of trying to eliminate those sorts of 
gifts, sorts of interactions. 
 
Well if you look at this profession, you look at this profession, 
which unfortunately is one of the least trusted professions, one 
of the least trusted professions, and there’s a reason for that. 
And the reason is these kind of rules, this kind of behaviour, 

when you have companies giving large donations, and that 
resulting in changes in policy that benefit those companies 
directly. 
 
You know even if you could, even if you could, Mr. Speaker, 
create some kind of a system where you could make sure that 
nobody on the government side was influenced by those 
donations when they went to make decisions, when they went to 
vote, even if you could do so, the reality is that the perception in 
the public matters. The way that they look at our profession 
matters because for us to do our job well, we need to be trusted. 
We need people to look at us and say, yes the people that I 
voted for, I know they’re going to work every day, working for 
my interests. 
 
Allan Blakeney often referred to politics as a noble calling, Mr. 
Speaker, and I agree with that. I believe it is a noble profession. 
Yes, I’ll join the minister in quoting Mr. Blakeney, talking 
about what is, it is a noble profession. I look across and I see 
people in this building who are decent people, who are here 
because they want to serve the people who have elected them. 
And I believe that to be true. I believe that to be true. 
 
But we’re giving the opposite impression. When we stand up 
and say we are committed to having corporate and union 
donations, we’re committed to keeping out-of-province 
donations, we’re committed to never putting a limit on personal 
donations, we’re giving the opposite impression to the public. 
We’re undermining the trust and confidence of the people of 
this province in the work that is so important that we do in this 
House. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, it is so important that we get off 
of this drug, that we get out from under the influence of these 
donations, that we change our regulations. And we have an 
opportunity today to pass this bill. And the members opposite 
know that today is a chance for us to do exactly what we need 
to do, Mr. Speaker. We could eliminate corporate and union 
donations. We could change the law today and enact a limit on 
individual donations. We can get rid of the out-of-province 
influence. 
 
This is a really important opportunity for us to get with the 
program. The federal government has done this. Almost every 
government across the country has already made these changes. 
This is the right way for us to go. 
 
And right now in Saskatchewan, instead of that, we’ve got a 
situation where we’ve got public institutions, libraries, 
universities, charities donating to political parties. You’ve got 
massive donations coming in from corporations, coming in 
from unions. You’ve got situations where you’ve got 53 
companies, 53 companies that gave a total of a million dollars 
in donations, ending up with $100 million in contracts. Talk 
about a return on their investment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Eighty-one per cent of the public says that we shouldn’t have 
any public institutions donating to our political parties. 
Sixty-nine per cent say no out-of-province donations. 
Seventy-four per cent say no money from charities, and 60 per 
cent agree that we shouldn’t have any corporate or union 
donations, Mr. Speaker. Our work here matters. Our work here 
matters, and when we continue to have the type of a situation 



4342 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2018 

that we see today, with no regulations whatsoever of any real 
impact, that cheapens the work of everyone in this place. 
 
And today, I look at the members across and I say to you 
members, you have a huge opportunity. These members have a 
huge opportunity today to stand up and do what’s right. And I 
look at the folks in the back benches there and I think, I hope 
today that the Premier has given you the opportunity to take a 
free vote, to stand up and vote with your conscience, because 
the people of the province are watching. They want to know if 
you’re willing to stand up and do what’s right, to get rid of the 
corporate and union donations, to do what we need to clean up 
this business, to re-establish the most important element — 
trust, Mr. Speaker. And I trust that the members here want to do 
what’s right. And I ask them to join me, and join the members 
today in supporting this bill. Thank you so much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Pursuant to rule 27, it is my duty to 
advise the Assembly that this item of business has been 
previously adjourned three times and that every question 
necessary to dispose of the motion will now be put. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the member from Saskatoon Centre that Bill 606, 
The Election (Fairness and Accountability) Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — All those opposed say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I believe the nos have it. Call in the 
members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 12:23 until 12:25.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the member from Saskatoon Centre that Bill No. 
606, The Election (Fairness and Accountability) Amendment 
Act, 2017 be now read a second time. All those members in 
favour of the motion please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 8] 
 
Meili Wotherspoon Beck 
Sproule Forbes Mowat 
Sarauer McCall  
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Those members opposed to the 
motion, please rise. 

[Nays — 42] 
 
Moe Merriman Stewart 
Reiter Wyant Morgan 
Duncan Marit Hargrave 
D’Autremont Cox Heppner 
Kaeding Makowsky Tell 
Eyre Brkich Harrison 
Ottenbreit Cheveldayoff Weekes 
Kirsch Bradshaw Fiaz 
Ross Carr Lawrence 
Young Wilson McMorris 
Michelson Bonk Doke 
Steinley Hindley Dennis 
Nerlien Steele Tochor 
Goudy Olauson Francis 
 
Principal Clerk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, those in favour of the 
motion, 8; those opposed, 42. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I declare the motion lost. I recognize 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, so that members may get 
out and enjoy a long weekend with their families and have a 
good long weekend, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until Tuesday, May the 22nd at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:28.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4319 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4319 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4319 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4319 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4319 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4319 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4320 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Regina Hosts the 100th Memorial Cup 
  Hindley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4320 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4320 
 Prince Albert Resident Donates to Children’s Hospital 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4320 
 Community Garden Spots Available for New Canadians 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4321 
 Jeans and Jewels Gala 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4321 
 Fire and Rescue Surf and Turf Fundraiser 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4321 
 Physician Recruitment in Rural Saskatchewan 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4321 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Donations to Political Parties 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4322 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4322 
 Treatment of Former Member Regarding Irrigation Project 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4322 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4322 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4323 
 Global Transportation Hub and Land Transactions  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4323 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4323 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4324 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4324 
 Measures to Address Sexual Assault 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4325 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4325 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4325 
 Apology Regarding Sixties Scoop 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4326 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4326 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4327 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4327 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 127 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4327 
 Bill No. 128 — The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2018 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4327 
 Bill No. 110 — The Animal Protection Act, 2017 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4328 
 Bill No. 83 — The Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 2017 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4328 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 110 — The Animal Protection Act, 2017 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4328 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4328 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Recruitment and Retention of Health Care Professionals 
  Weekes ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4329, 4339 
  Mowat ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4331, 4338 
  Young ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4332, 4339 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4334, 4338 
  Steele .............................................................................................................................................................................. 4335, 4338 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4336 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4338 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4338 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4338 
  Goudy ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4339 
  Francis ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4339 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 606 — The Election (Fairness and Accountability) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4340 
 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 4342 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


