


















































April 23, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 46A  MONDAY, APRIL 23, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3965 
 April 23, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Introduction of guests, and I have a 
school group. So seated in the west gallery, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce a group of 41 grade 8 students from the Huda School 
in Regina which is in the constituency of Regina Coronation 
Park. And with them is Sajada Tauqueer and Karen 
Gunnlaugson. Thank you so much for bringing this group of 
students. 
 
I look forward to getting pummelled in questions and answers 
with them, but an amazing group of students, an amazing 
school. Congratulations on your new addition, the Cortoba. And 
again, looking forward to coming to your classroom and 
continuing with the conversation. But again, on behalf of all 
members and myself, welcome to your Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you, I’d like to introduce five people from 
the Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association sitting in your 
gallery. I know, Mr. Speaker, we’re all grateful that the snow 
has finally gone, but I know these folks were quite enjoying the 
six months of winter that we did have. But these guests, I’d like 
to introduce them, and I’d like them to wave a little bit if they 
don’t mind: Jennifer Schneider, Debbie Giesinger, Leah 
Switzer, Derek Silversides, and president and CEO [chief 
executive officer] Chris Brewer. 
 
These guests are here today to listen to the second reading of 
Bill 123, The Snowmobile Amendment Act. Their organization 
has been instrumental during the consultation process for the 
amendment, and I thank them for their work. And I thank them 
for attending today, and I’d like all members to join me in 
welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On behalf 
of the official opposition, I would like to join with the minister 
in welcoming these representatives from the Saskatchewan 
Snowmobile Association to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Certainly the snowmobile association plays an instrumental role 
in the world-class trail system we have here in Saskatchewan to 
sled till our hearts’ content. And certainly this is an organization 
that is an exemplar in terms of taking an interest in a passion 
and making it even better for not just themselves, but for all of 
us, Mr. Speaker.  
 
So I just want to say, on behalf of the official opposition, thank 
you for all the work that you do. Good to see you here at your 
Legislative Assembly. And it’s great to see, the name Brewer 

certainly rings out in terms of the work that’s been done with 
the snowmobile association, so it’s particularly good to see 
Chris Brewer here at his Legislative Assembly. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I join with the minister in asking all members to 
welcome these individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Regina Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Legislative Assembly, a very good friend of mine seated in 
the west gallery, Andrea Smotra. Andrea has been a very good 
friend of mine, but she’s also been just a wonderful supporter, 
has worked on all three of my political campaigns here and has 
been just a wonderful asset. 
 
Andrea also comes with a very good political record. She 
worked in Prime Minister Harper’s office in Ottawa. And then 
she moved on to be a special adviser in Premier Brian 
Pallister’s office, the Premier of Manitoba, and is now working 
as government relations for the city of Red Deer. So I’d ask 
everyone here to please welcome Andrea to her Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would 
like to welcome Chris Brewer from the SSA [Saskatchewan 
Snowmobile Association] here. I’ve been on quite a few rides 
with Chris, and he organizes some great events on our 
provincial ride every year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the other thing is he has managed to tone down the 
member from Yorkton who drives like a wild man when he gets 
out there, Mr. Speaker, and managed to crash a couple of sleds 
that he had borrowed from other people. And Chris was 
instrumental in slowing him down this year and looking after 
him. So again I’d like the Assembly to welcome Chris to his 
Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I 
rise to present a petition to get big money out of Saskatchewan 
politics. And the people signing this petition want to bring to 
our attention the following: that Saskatchewan’s outdated 
election Act allows corporations and unions and others, even 
those outside the province, to make unlimited donations to our 
province’s political parties. You know, Mr. Speaker, that the 
people of Saskatchewan deserve to live in a fair province where 
all voices are equal and money can’t influence politics. 
 
And we know, Mr. Speaker, that over the past 10 years the 
Saskatchewan Party has received $12.61 million in corporate 
donations and, of that, 2.87 million came from companies 
outside Saskatchewan. You know, we all agree that 
Saskatchewan politics should belong to Saskatchewan people 
and that the federal government and the provinces of Alberta, 
Manitoba, Quebec, Nova Scotia, now British Columbia have 
moved to limit the influence and level the playing field by 



3966 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2018 

banning corporate and union donations to political parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign finance laws, 
to end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 
from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 
on individual donations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today come from 
the city of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to stand 
today to present a petition for a second bridge for Prince Albert. 
The individuals who signed this petition wish to draw these 
following points to your attention: that the Diefenbaker bridge 
in Prince Albert is the primary link that connects the southern 
part of the province to the North and that the need for a second 
bridge for Prince Albert has never been clearer than it is today; 
Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution; that local municipal governments have 
limited resources and require a second bridge to be funded 
through federal and provincial governments and not a P3 
[public-private partnership] model; and that the Saskatchewan 
Party government refuses to stand up for Prince Albert in this 
critical infrastructure issue. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert, using federal and provincial dollars. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this particular petition 
come from the community of Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical workplace supports for 
survivors of domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, we all know, 
because we’ve been speaking about it for a few years now, that 
Saskatchewan has the dubious distinction of having the highest 
rates of intimate partner violence amongst all the provinces in 
Canada. We all must do so much more to protect survivors of 
domestic violence, and we know now that for many of them, 
violence will follow them to their workplace. That’s why those 
signatories to this petition are calling for five days of paid leave 
and up to 17 weeks of unpaid leave be made available to 
workers who are survivors of domestic violence, and that 
critical workplace supports be made available to survivors of 
domestic violence if they are living with post-traumatic stress 

disorder as a result of that domestic violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what we called for in our private member’s 
bill, Bill No. 609. This is the fourth time we’ve put forward 
these provisions in this bill. It’s time for the government to step 
up, do the right thing, and pass that piece of legislation. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to pass legislation to ensure 
critical supports in the workplace, including reasonable 
accommodation and paid and unpaid leave for survivors of 
intimate partner violence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today come 
from Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Nipawin, 
White Fox, and Codette. Thank you. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Recognizing Sunchild Law’s Contributions  
to the Community 

 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
acknowledge the impressive work of a lawyer in The 
Battlefords area, Eleanore Sunchild, and her practice Sunchild 
Law. 
 
Sunchild was recently profiled in The Battlefords’ 
News-Optimist. Sunchild Law is located on Poundmaker land 
along Highway 4. Sunchild’s practice specializes in residential 
school claims, often dealing with severe cases of physical and 
sexual abuse. In addition to this challenging work, Sunchild has 
also worked to raise awareness about residential schools in the 
province, including the Battleford Industrial School and its 
cemetery.  
 
Sunchild has been working with community members to have 
the nearly forgotten Battleford Industrial School cemetery 



April 23, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3967 

receive provincial-level heritage designation. Sunchild is an 
advocate for education as a way for non-indigenous people to 
understand the effects of colonization, suggesting mandatory 
inclusion of colonial history in curriculum starting in 
elementary school. She also suggests that those wanting to 
educate themselves turn to the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission reports and hear from residential school survivors 
and elders. 

In light of the TRC [Truth and Reconciliation Commission] and 
the ethnic inequalities in our province, Mr. Speaker, the work of 
Sunchild should be acknowledged as an example of how we can 
move together toward reconciliation. I want to invite all 
members to join me in acknowledging the work of Eleanore 
Sunchild and to join me in thanking her for her contributions to 
her community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 

Atamiskākēwak National Gathering in Moose Jaw 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I, 
along with the Minister of Government Relations, the Minister 
of Social Services, and the member from Moose Jaw North, had 
the pleasure of attending the opening ceremonies of 
Atamiskākēwak National Gathering. People from all across the 
province and country gathered to recognize and honour the 
indigenous people who are a vital part of Saskatchewan’s past, 
present, and future. 

Those in attendance included the Lieutenant Governor, Chief 
and Elder Noel Starblanket, and Moose Jaw’s mayor, Fraser 
Tolmie, among many other indigenous and non-indigenous 
dignitaries. 

Mr. Speaker, this gathering will take place throughout the week. 
Activities will include discussions, sporting tournaments, 
lectures, art displays, and entertainment. The goal of this 
celebration is to help build stronger relationships, create greater 
understanding, and to foster a deeper trust between indigenous 
and non-indigenous peoples. 

Mr. Speaker, events like this help guide us all in our shared 
journey as we continue to implement the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission’s 94 Calls to Action. On behalf of 
this entire Assembly, I want to thank the city of Moose Jaw, 
Kallie Wood and Chris McKee from Converging Pathways, and 
the many people who are serving as Chairs on this event’s 
organizing committee for all their hard work. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

Point-in-Time Counts Help Build a Plan 
to End Homelessness 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, last week I was inspired by 
a packed gymnasium at the YMCA [Young Men’s Christian 
Association] here in Regina, united to end homelessness in 
Saskatchewan. I was pleased to join with my colleague from 
Saskatoon Fairview and brings thanks to Regina’s point-in-time 
homelessness count. The mayor, city councillors, and the 

minister were also there. 

[13:45] 

Mr. Speaker, more than 200 volunteers signed up to take part in 
Wednesday evening’s count here in Regina. Hundreds more 
took up the call across Saskatchewan in Saskatoon and Prince 
Albert. To say the least, I’m incredibly encouraged by the 
massive turnout of volunteers ready to act on homelessness and 
to ensure housing stability and security for all. When 
committees conduct counts at the same time of year using a 
common approach, the results can be used to build a better 
understanding of homelessness in Canada, to build a plan, to 
respond to needs, and ultimately to act to end homelessness. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to give special thanks to the YMCA’s 
John Bailey, Shawn Fraser, Regina’s point-in-time organizer 
Addison Docherty, Tarin Kennedy, and project consultant 
Dagan Harding, the PIT [point-in-time] count committee, and 
all the community partners, organizations, and volunteers 
working every day to ensure safe, stable housing, and building a 
plan to end homelessness. Together, Mr. Speaker, let’s make 
that happen. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
University. 

Saskatoon Police Service Exemplary Service Awards 

Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was honoured to 
bring greetings and attend the Saskatoon Police Service 
Exemplary Service Awards on behalf of the Minister of 
Corrections and Policing on April 18th. The police Exemplary 
Service Medal recognizes officers who have served in an 
exemplary manner, characterized by good conduct, industry, 
and efficiency. 

Recipients of this year’s awards featured eight officers who 
were receiving their 20-year exemplary service medals, four 
officers receiving their 30-year bar, and two officers taking 
home their 40-year bar. We cannot thank them enough for their 
service and dedication to the constituents from all over 
Saskatoon, making safety and service their top priority. 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to congratulate the civilian 
members and special constables who were recognized for their 
service, especially two young men, Brody Anger and Jay 
Luo-Tatebe, who rescued a man from the University Bridge; 
and Hayley Hesseln, who pulled a woman from the South 
Saskatchewan River. 

I was given the opportunity to also thank the families of the 
award recipients, as their strength and support throughout the 
many years of our officers’ service is the true foundation on 
which they depend. We know that this job is not easy, but we 
thank them for continually committing their efforts and lives to 
keeping our communities safe and protected. 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members please join me in 
congratulating the 2018 Saskatoon Police Service Exemplary 
Service Award recipients. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Pasqua. 



3968 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2018 

Skills Canada Provincial Competition Held in Regina 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday I had the 
opportunity to represent our government at the Skills Canada 
provincial competition closing ceremony and awards banquet 
here in Regina. This year was the 20th anniversary of the 
competition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year nearly 500 competitors from across the 
province took part in 38 different competitions. Competitors 
included some of Saskatchewan’s best and brightest upcoming 
trades and technology professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to the education, 
training, and development of a skilled workforce, and is a proud 
sponsor of provincial skills competitions. With its diverse 
economy, Saskatchewan has one of the strongest labour markets 
in Canada. I am proud to say that our world-class industries 
hold some of the country’s highest-quality skilled trade 
workers. Mr. Speaker, it is competitions that allows 
Saskatchewan’s next generation to gain hands-on experience in 
their chosen skilled trade or technology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do like to congratulate all participants, as well as 
this year’s gold medal winners who can now look forward to 
further represent Saskatchewan at the Skills Canada National 
Competition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Archaeology Professor Works to Preserve  
Saskatchewan Heritage 

 
Ms. Lambert: — Today I stand to recognize Dr. Ernie Walker, 
who is a University of Saskatchewan archaeology professor. Dr. 
Walker had a great influence on the successful fundraising 
campaign that was launched to purchase the land to construct 
Wanuskewin Heritage Park’s iconic building that is so visible to 
those living in and visiting Saskatoon. He refers to Wanuskewin 
as his baby, and he has been working with the park since 1978. 
Dr. Walker and I serve on the Wanuskewin board of directors 
together, and I have witnessed first-hand his commitment and 
his enthusiasm. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Walker is currently involved in the $40 
million renewal campaign, Thundering Ahead, focused on 
making Wanuskewin Canada’s premier cultural destination. 
This campaign’s goal is to have the park designated a UNESCO 
[United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization] World Heritage Site, which would be a first for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
An interesting fact for the Assembly is that while working in 
Wanuskewin, he discovered ancient artifacts left by Great 
Plains First Nations groups that were used more than 6,000 
years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Walker is in his 38th year of teaching, but 
plans to retire after his 40th year. He says he will never leave 
the work at his legacy, Wanuskewin, behind as he is so proud of 
the community who built and preserved this remarkable site. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to please join me in thanking 
Dr. Ernie Walker for his many years of dedication and service 
to Wanuskewin and preserving Saskatchewan’s heritage. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

Pharmacist Awareness Month Recognizes  
Skilled Health Care Providers 

 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand here today to 
recognize that March was Pharmacist Awareness Month. Mr. 
Speaker, pharmacists are important, highly skilled members of 
the health care team serving our residents. Working in both 
hospitals and community pharmacies across the province, 
pharmacists are often a patient’s first point of contact with the 
health system. They work closely with each individual, 
providing a wide array of responsibilities, including prescribing 
medication, one-on-one medication reviews, and counselling on 
health conditions and chronic diseases. 
 
As much as they play a key role in a patient’s care experience, 
Mr. Speaker, our government has collaborated with pharmacists 
on several initiatives in recent years to improve patient care in 
our province. One great example of this expansion of 
pharmacist scope was to practise including giving flu shots. We 
look forward to developing further opportunities for 
pharmacists to use their expertise and their range of skills to 
contribute to our health care system. Mr. Speaker, it is 
important to us to have a strong and vibrant pharmacist 
workforce. 
 
On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan and the people 
of Saskatchewan, I would like to thank the dedicated and 
compassionate pharmacists of this province for the work that 
they do every single day. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to remind everyone this is the 
Speaker’s school group. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Members of the Legislative Assembly  
Seeking Federal Office 

 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to start by 
extending my congratulations to the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. He’s the second Sask Party MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] to win a federal nomination for the 
Conservative Party this year, and good for him. But by seeking 
this nomination the member from Saskatoon Eastview and now 
the member from Regina Walsh Acres have made it clear that 
they don’t want to be MLAs in Saskatchewan, they want to be 
MPs [Member of Parliament] in Ottawa. 
 
Does the Premier think that it’s okay for MLAs to be on the 
Saskatchewan government payroll while they’re off 
campaigning for a federal seat for the Conservatives? Or will he 
commit to changing the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly 
Act to ensure that the elected representatives of the people of 
Saskatchewan are working in their best interests instead of 



April 23, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3969 

focusing on fundraising for the Conservative Party and 
campaigning for a job in Ottawa? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, we could ask the member 
opposite’s patients exactly the same question, Mr. Speaker, as 
he’s here serving in this Assembly. 
 
But I would like to join the member opposite in congratulating 
these members that have been successful in their nomination, 
Mr. Speaker. And the fact of the matter is, is that they can serve 
in this Assembly and can represent the constituents that they’re 
representative of their constituency over the next period of time. 
As we know, Mr. Speaker, there is no by-election. It does not 
have to be called if the seat becomes vacant following the first 
40 months after a general election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Precedent has been set, Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly in years 
past. Precedent has been set by former NDP [New Democratic 
Party] MLA, John Solomon. Mr. Speaker, he won a federal 
nomination for the NDP but continued to serve as an MLA until 
the federal election officially began in September of 1993, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Former Member and Irrigation Project Approval Process 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the members, the residents 
of Saskatoon Eastview and Regina Walsh Acres would prefer to 
have their MLA working for them, rather than working to land 
a job in Ottawa. Working for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But not even a year ago, a member from the opposite side, a 
member they said embodied their values and ideals, who they 
said was the DNA of the Sask Party, was found by the Conflict 
of Interest Commissioner to be working for his own personal 
gain, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now we know, and now we know that Bill Boyd had 
conversations with the Premier about this very project, that as 
of Thursday the Premier couldn’t remember when he first saw 
the plans for this problematic irrigation scheme. So now after 
the Premier has had some time over the weekend to think about 
it, to review his records, can he remember when Bill Boyd 
showed him the plans for this project? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I never gave that a moment’s 
thought over the weekend, Mr. Speaker, because it’s not 
unusual for the Minister of the Environment, Water Security 
Agency, as well as officials throughout the organization to work 
with projects across the province when it comes to water 
conveyance — whether that be for industry projects; whether 
that be, Mr. Speaker, in the case of attempting to stop or get in 
front of some of the high water levels that we have in certain 
areas, and most notable come to mind, Mr. Speaker, is the water 
in and around the Quill Lakes. 
 
But I also said, Mr. Speaker, that the people of the province can 

be assured of this. They can be assured that the process that was 
undertaken with respect to this violation of environmental law 
here in this province, Mr. Speaker, was exactly the same for this 
individual as it would be for any other individual in the 
province of Saskatchewan. The individual was charged, Mr. 
Speaker. He pled guilty, Mr. Speaker. He received one of the 
larger fines ever administered under environmental law in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, most 
importantly, he’s required to remediate the bank of the river 
back to its original state. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I do think it is a bit unusual that 
that wouldn’t cause the Premier some consideration, that he 
would think it not unusual for members to go directly to the 
minister or to the minister’s staff to pursue their own projects. 
And I want to quote the Premier from last week: “I can’t 
remember exactly when he talked to me, but I know he talked.” 
So there was clearly something about that conversation with 
Bill Boyd that struck the Premier, that was memorable for the 
Premier. 
 
The Premier insists that the system works, but when it comes to 
a project where an MLA had already been found to be using 
political office for his own personal gain, the Premier admitted 
that he did have some discussion with Bill Boyd but couldn’t 
remember the details. 
 
Since the Premier doesn’t seem to be able to remember when he 
first discussed this irrigation scheme with Mr. Boyd, when did 
his office first learn that Mr. Boyd had broken the law? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, to answer that question is, 
when I was informed by my deputy minister. There’s the short 
answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With respect to quotes that were made last week, Mr. Speaker, I 
was accused, or the accusation was put forward that the minister 
of day, which was yours truly, should know when someone is 
dealing with the ministry officials across the province, Mr. 
Speaker. And in this case, the individual — as is due process 
with all individuals that I talk to, look at their plans — is to get 
in touch with the appropriate officials within the Ministry of 
Water Security Agency, Environment, Agriculture, where that 
may be. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition said this, and I 
quote: 
 

You would think that he would know if one of his 
members within his caucus was accessing services within 
his ministry and going directly to ministry employees. Was 
he not paying attention, in which case, not doing his job 
fully? Or was he in some way complicit of approving of 
these activities? 

 
It was later in the day, Mr. Speaker, then we were accused of 
attending a meeting with our deputy ministers to be brought up 
to speed — myself and other ministers, Mr. Speaker — on this 
very case. So the answer to the question, Mr. Speaker, is when 



3970 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2018 

my deputy minister informed me. Everything in this case, the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan can rest assured that 
this individual was treated in an identical fashion as anyone 
across the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The process, 
in this case, has worked. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps I should have been a bit 
more specific. When I’m asking, when did you discover this, 
I’d like to know on what date did the deputy minister inform 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, if I don’t know the date, I 
don’t know the date. I don’t know the date that I looked at the 
projects out east of Regina here, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know the 
date of the date that I looked at the projects in my home 
constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook, a number of different 
drainage projects in that area as well, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know 
the date that I looked at various proposals put forward by the 
members in the Quill lakes area, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t 
know the dates of some of the conveyance channels that I have 
looked at coming out of Lake Diefenbaker, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
recall the exact dates, Mr. Speaker. But I did look at those plans 
like I’d looked at anyone else’s plans that I may have looked at 
across the province as minister, Mr. Speaker, and engaging as 
an active minister on the file, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the fact of the matter is, is the advice that I provided to this 
individual, and any other individual, Mr. Speaker, was to get in 
contact with the officials within the Water Security Agency to 
ensure that the rules are followed. And when they’re not 
followed, as in this case, Mr. Speaker, there are charges that are 
laid. This individual pled guilty, and the people of the province 
can rest assured that this process was handled in a responsible 
fashion and exactly the same way as it would be for anyone in 
the province. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier maintained last week and seems to be maintaining 
again that Mr. Boyd was treated in precisely the same manner 
that anyone would be treated. And yet the deputy ministers of 
the Environment and Agriculture said Thursday that they and 
the then deputy minister to the Premier, former leadership 
candidate Alanna Koch, stepped in directly on this matter in 
early June, two months before any charges were laid, because 
the infractions they’d found involved a high-profile individual.  
 
So which is it then, Mr. Speaker? Does the Premier still 
maintain that Mr. Boyd received no special treatment for his 
application or addressing his violations of The Environmental 
Management and Protection Act, wildlife protection Act, or 
was he treated differently because he’s a high-profile 
individual? Which is it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is dealing with two 
different things. One is an application, which come from any 
number of individuals across the province. That would have 
been dealt with by officials. The other is an infraction. And the 
infraction was elevated to the level of the deputy minister 
becoming aware of it, the deputy ministers becoming aware, in 
which they informed their minister. Which is precisely what the 
Leader of the Opposition suggested in the rotunda should 
happen, is that the minister should become of aware of it or else 
he doesn’t know his files, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will refer to an email sent by the senior 
technician of water rights and approvals dated May 23rd: 
 

Received a phone call today from Bill Boyd asking the 
status of the subject project. I told him that I had taken a 
preliminary look at the project and indicated that I have a 
few projects to get to before I start working on this file. 

 
The email goes on to conclude: 
 

I told him that when I have completed the projects I have 
on my desk right now, I would start working on it. I told 
him as a timeline possibly next week and a half. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as you can see from this email and other emails, 
that he clearly was treated in a professional manner by civil 
servants, not a preferential manner. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Treatment of Saskatchewan Immigrant  
Nominee Program Clients 

 
Ms. Mowat: — This goes far beyond illegal modifications to a 
river bank, Mr. Speaker. Months after Boyd was booted from 
cabinet in the summer of 2016, a company was incorporated, 
which Bill Boyd was described as the chairman of. Chinese 
investors were given the impression that in exchange for 
$300,000, they would be part owners of an irrigation pivot that 
could more easily obtain residency through SINP’s 
[Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program] entrepreneur 
category. This business model, much like the plans for the 
megamall at the GTH [Global Transportation Hub], aligns with 
the requirements of SINP, almost like it was drummed up by 
someone who was minister responsible for the file for the better 
part of five years. 
 
To the minister: following the commissioner’s ruling on Bill 
Boyd’s conflict, what steps were taken to investigate potential 
abuse of the SINP program through Boyd’s irrigation 
immigration scheme? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well what I can tell the member 
opposite, and I think we’ll have a chance to talk about this at 
estimates tonight as well, we take the program integrity at SINP 
as the very top priority, Mr. Speaker. We have put additional 
resourcing into program integrity at SINP. It’s something that 
we’re very proud of. It’s actually why we’ve been allocated 



April 23, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3971 

additional numbers on our SINP program year over year over 
year, Mr. Speaker, by the Government of Canada, because we 
have what is generally regarded as the best provincial nominee 
program in the entire country. And the reason it’s regarded that 
way, Mr. Speaker, is because nobody, nobody is given 
preferential treatment. Nobody is given preferential treatment. 
 
There’s a process that’s followed professionally by officials. I 
can say, as someone who’s been minister for most of the past 
four years, that we take these things extraordinarily seriously. 
The minister does not get directly involved in any of these 
applications, Mr. Speaker. These are handled by public servants 
who do a very good job. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Nothing about what investigation has taken 
place here, Mr. Speaker. And if there’s no preferential 
treatment, then there should be no problem putting forward an 
investigation and the results of that investigation. 
 
It’s clear that the issue has not been fully canvassed. Eight 
months after the commissioner found Boyd to have used his 
role as an MLA to pursue his private agenda, Boyd has received 
multiple fines for modifying the shoreline for this project. And 
just last week we learned the Premier was privy to information 
about this project. As former minister of Immigration on the 
file, efforts to develop a business model targeting SINP’s 
entrepreneur stream should have raised alarm bells for the 
government. The Conflict of Interest Commissioner said his 
initial investigation was limited in scope and couldn’t 
investigate whether potential investors were misled or whether 
they were being gouged on their investments. 
 
The former premier said the commissioner’s findings were 
forwarded to Justice to see if any other charges were warranted 
on this matter. What were the findings? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — You know, Mr. Speaker, clearly 
ministers don’t get directly involved in investigations, as they 
should not be directly involved. This is something that is 
handled by public servants. We trust them to do their work, Mr. 
Speaker. And as I said, we put the very highest priority on 
program integrity at the provincial nominee program. 
 
You know, frequently we have members on both sides of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, who have asked for files to be reviewed. I 
can point to a whole number of members opposite who have, 
under this program, asked for the minister to directly get 
involved.  
 
And what I have told members . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
See, yes, see, Mr. Speaker. And I will tell this House what I told 
the members opposite, which is that we have very, very 
professional public servants that deal with these things in a 
rules-based way. We put in place the policy, Mr. Speaker, as 
government. That policy is implemented and enforced by the 
public servants at SINP who, as I said, do a very good job, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — I think that last question, Mr. Speaker, was for 
the Minister of Justice and what his department is doing with 
respect to Brad Wall’s request that Justice review it. So it’s 
unfortunate it wasn’t answered. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, these questions aren’t new to the 
Sask Party. When last asked about immigration concerns at 
GTEC [Global Trade and Exhibition Centre], which is the 
Brightenview project at GTH, the Sask Party said they weren’t 
concerned as long as the cheque cleared. Now, Mr. Speaker, we 
have email correspondence from the CEO of Brightenview, 
who sent his concerns about rejected immigration cases to 
Bryan Richards, the CEO at the GTH. And upon receiving these 
emails, Bryan Richards promptly forwarded them to the deputy 
minister of Economy, none other than Laurie Pushor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to know how many other businesses have a 
direct line to the deputy minister when their immigration cases 
are rejected. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well I would point to the preamble of 
the member’s question, talking about rejected immigration 
applications, Mr. Speaker, to show that we take program 
integrity very, very seriously, that no companies have any 
specific in with the minister most definitely, but everyone is 
treated equally under the program. Applications are dealt with 
in a professional fashion. 
 
In fact we redesigned how the entrepreneur stream . . . And we 
actually suspended the entrepreneur stream for a while pending 
redesign, and that was about four years ago, Mr. Speaker. We 
worked with the national government in putting in place best 
practice on that stream and we believe that we continue to have 
the best immigration program in the entire country, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So, as I said, we have confidence in our administration of the 
SINP. We have confidence in our officials that manage that 
program, and we have a process in place that ministers are not 
directly involved in. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, a direct line to Laurie Pushor, 
and that’s that minister’s deputy minister for Economy; now 
most people wouldn’t think that’s normal. But we know of 
others who had direct access to Laurie Pushor as the deputy 
minister, and that situation ended up as an $11 million land flip 
at the GTH. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, 13 days after the inquiry from 
Brightenview, Laurie Pushor sent an email to immigration 
officials saying, and I quote, “Bryan is all over me for an update 
on our work to see if the Beijing office issues can be resolved.”  
 
Mr. Speaker, it is clear that the CEO of the GTH and the deputy 
minister are deeply concerned about the rejected immigration 



3972 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2018 

cases at GTEC. So I’ll ask the minister again. Does this concern 
extend to other businesses applying for SINP, or is it just 
Brightenview that has a direct line to the deputy minister? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can speak for my 
involvement or lack thereof in any of these matters, as the 
minister. The minister does not get directly involved in 
individual immigration cases, aside from talking to members 
who are advocating perhaps on that side, perhaps on this side, 
bringing particular issues to our attention. I then pass those 
along to officials for their action, with no recommendation one 
way or the other, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have policies in place that are set by the provincial 
government. We work very closely on this policy area because 
it is an area of joint jurisdiction with the Government of 
Canada. We’ve done, I think, best practice work as far as 
putting in place policies of SINP that have enabled us to have 
increases to that program granted year after year after year to 
the point right now where we have the same SINP allocation as 
the province of Ontario, Mr. Speaker, the same as the province 
of British Columbia, the same as the province of Alberta. And 
why is that, Mr. Speaker? Why have we been granted those 
increases year over year? Because Citizenship and Immigration 
Canada believe and know that we have one of the very best 
programs in the entire country that puts an absolute premium on 
integrity. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, here’s the thing. Laurie Pushor 
has been in the spotlight before. He was one of the key players 
in their GTH land scandal, but we failed to get any answers 
from him about how things went down and how the people of 
Saskatchewan managed to lose out on $11 million because over 
and over again the Sask Party have refused to let him testify at 
committee. And the entire Sask Party cabinet voted in favour of 
that land deal, Mr. Speaker. Then every Sask Party leadership 
candidate, including the Premier, said there needs to be more 
transparency at the GTH. 
 
So if the Premier will do as the Deputy Premier has asked and 
shine a bright light on the issues at the GTH, will they allow 
Mr. Pushor to now testify at committee? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — You know, Mr. Speaker, there are some 
members on that side of the House that were in government at 
one time. They know what it’s like. People come to government 
and say, this is my issue, this is my problem. This is what it is. 
And it’s the responsibility of MLAs and deputy ministers to 
make sure that those people get referred to the proper office, 
that their information gets taken forward. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, ministers and deputy ministers don’t change 
policy. They don’t make policy. They make the broad policy, 
but individual decisions are always made by the appropriate 
officials using the guidelines, using the regulations there. We 
don’t make those decisions, nor should we make those 

decisions. And I hope that those members opposite didn’t make 
them when they were in government as well. And if that’s how 
they’re talking about now and want to, I hope they never are in 
government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Coverage for Taxi Drivers Injured at Work 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, last week a Regina cab driver, 
Umar Ali, was assaulted while at work. Umar, who has been 
driving a cab for the past two years, was slashed in the throat 
and stabbed multiple times in his side and stomach. Mr. 
Speaker, this husband and father of four young children was 
trying to do what we all do each and every day: provide for his 
family and come home safe to them at the end of the day. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t the first time a taxi driver 
has been attacked on the job and seriously injured in our 
province. 
 
Last week I asked the minister to do the right thing and use his 
authority to make the necessary changes to protect workers like 
Umar. I want to give the minister another chance today. Will 
the Sask Party commit to changes today to help taxi drivers who 
are injured at work? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite just 
passed over the consent so I’ll be able to report to the House 
more specifically on the particular individual that’s involved. 
But I indicated last week when I answered the question two 
things: first of all, we have enormous sympathy for any 
individual that’s hurt on the job under violent or under any 
other circumstances. 
 
I also indicated that the distinction whether a person has 
coverage or does not have coverage is whether they are in an 
employee capacity or not an employee capacity. However if a 
person is not working as a cab driver as an employee of 
somebody else, they’re entitled to go to Workers’ 
Compensation and ask for and apply for the coverage 
themselves. In either case, there’s a cost to it. It’s either borne 
by the employer or, if the person is self-employed, they would 
pay for it themselves.  
 
It’s not terribly expensive and I would encourage everybody 
that’s self-employed to consider applying to Workers’ 
Compensation for coverage, not just for this but for any other 
instance. We will of course look at this one, and we’ll also look 
at it in the context of whether there’s anything that can or 
should be done any different with regard to cab drivers. I thank 
the member for the question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, joining us today in the gallery 
is Wajid Ali, Umar’s brother. Wajid has taken time off work to 
help his brother’s family deal with this terrible situation. He 
also drives a taxi in Regina and he has set up a GoFundMe 
campaign to help support his brother’s family. Mr. Speaker, the 



April 23, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3973 

donations are appreciated because cab drivers are not 
automatically covered by insurance or workers’ compensation. 
But all workers in Saskatchewan should be able to count on the 
support of the government when they are injured at work. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Taxi drivers are certified by the labour board as workers, and 
yet they are ignored and forced to fend for themselves. Mr. 
Speaker, for far too long, cab drivers have been treated like 
second class citizens in Saskatchewan. Will the minister and 
this government do the right thing and address the WCB 
[Workers’ Compensation Board] coverage gap for 
Saskatchewan cab drivers? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, cab drivers are a lot like 
farmers. Some are self employed; some work for other people. 
If you work for somebody else, you’re covered. If you’re self 
employed, you’re an employer. You’re not automatically 
covered, but there is optional coverage that’s available for you. 
 
I can say to the members opposite — and some of them are 
former teachers — substitute and part-time teachers had no 
coverage under workers’ compensation, a huge gap that was left 
there for literally decades. When we formed government, we 
changed the legislation so that those people are now covered. 
So if a part-time teacher or a substitute teacher falls or is injured 
at work, they’re fully covered through Workers’ Compensation 
Board. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would encourage anybody that’s a 
self-employed worker to look at workers’ compensation 
coverage for exactly the reasons that the member opposite 
raised. Mr. Speaker, those things are important to all citizens in 
the province, to make sure that workers come home safely 
every night, and that if there’s something happens, that they do 
have some financial protection for them. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
indicated we’re prepared to have a look at this particular 
situation. Mr. Speaker, we don’t automatically legislate people 
that are self employed to pay for something on their own behalf. 
It’s a decision they would make on their own. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Cannabis Distribution Model 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, details on this government’s 
legal cannabis are trickling out at a snail’s pace at best. We 
learned last week that potential retailers won’t know until 
weeks before the federal legislation comes into force whether 
they succeeded in getting a retail permit or not. This will cause 
further stress on applicants, who will only have weeks after 
learning they are successful to set up the infrastructure for their 
businesses and who have only weeks to do so if they wait. And 
despite legalization being months away, there are still so many 
unanswered questions around consultation, the price 
projections, and how and whether the government will be 
sharing the revenue.  
 
Why is the Sask Party dragging its feet on this instead of seeing 

it for the economic opportunity it really is? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve been saying since the beginning, Mr. Speaker, that we 
would like some more time from the federal government to 
ensure we look at this as closely as we can. SLGA 
[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] and other 
ministries have been looking at this very closely over the last 
few months, Mr. Speaker. It certainly is an opportunity. I think 
different provinces have different kinds of models, different 
regimes. And I think Saskatchewan is a great place in order to 
do business, Mr. Speaker. We’re allowing the private sector to 
do their work and there’s great opportunity that way, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It’s very interesting the NDP now is interested in helping small 
business. Many times, many times in this House since I’ve been 
in government, and many years before that, they’d voted against 
small business, most recently the threshold. Of course this 
entire conversation would be a moot point, Mr. Speaker, if the 
NDP happened to be in government. There’s no doubt about 
that. They would have a public monopoly . . .  
 
The Speaker: — Thank you, Minister. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 126 — The Energy Export Act 
 

Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 
No. 126, The Energy Export Act be now introduced and read a 
first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Energy 
and Resources that Bill No. 126, The Energy Export Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Next sitting of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 127 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 127, 
The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 



3974 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2018 

that Bill No. 127, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018 be 
now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 128 — The Provincial Sales Tax  
Amendment Act, 2018 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 128, 
The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2018 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — Moved by the Minister of Finance that Bill 
No. 128, The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2018 be 
now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Unparliamentary Language 
 
The Speaker: — Just before orders of the day, I’ve got a 
statement to read. On Thursday, April the 19th, 2018, the 
Government House Leader raised the point of order that the 
member for Saskatoon Nutana had accused members of 
deliberately making incorrect statements. I’ve reviewed the 
record and will respond to the point of order. 
 
In reaction to comments from across the floor, the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana did accuse some government members of 
deliberately making incorrect statements about her position on 
the Leap Manifesto. I think all members know that it is not 
unparliamentary to criticize statements made by members to be 
contrary to the facts, but imputations of intentional falsehoods 

are not permissible. This can be found at paragraph 494 of 
Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules & Forms, 6th Edition. 
Beauchesne also states that a statement made by a member 
respecting themselves and within their own personal knowledge 
must be accepted. So in this instance, I have some sympathy for 
the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
During the 75-minute debate, there were instances when 
members on both sides of the House hurled personal insults and 
accusations across the floor. While many of these comments 
were not reflected in the official records, I want to remind 
members that yelling comments from your seats, such as “that’s 
a lie,” only escalates unparliamentary discourse. These 
provocative statements added to the downward spiral of 
unacceptable parliamentary debate, incited disorder, and were 
not respectful. This spilled over into the debate on Bill 606. 
Therefore I do not think it is fair to single out one member. I 
caution all members that this behaviour will not and should not 
be tolerated in this Assembly. 
 
As a final note, I think that member should reflect on our code 
of ethical conduct, and in particular the commitment to your 
colleagues. That is, we owe loyalty to shared principles, respect 
for differences, and fairness in political dealings. It might take 
some work, but I think all members should take heed of their 
own code of conduct and govern themselves accordingly. 
Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 225 and 226. 
 
The Speaker: — Tabled 205, 226. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 123 — The Snowmobile (Fees) Amendment Act, 2018 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise today to move second reading of The 
Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2018. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
housekeeping amendment to make the allocation of fees from 
snowmobile registrations more practical. 
 
SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] collects registration 
fees for all vehicles, including snowmobiles, on behalf of the 
province. That revenue is then submitted to the General 
Revenue Fund, or GRF. Currently SGI remits all registration 
fees to the GRF, then advises the Ministry of Parks, Culture and 
Sport how much of the fees are for snowmobile registrations. 
The ministry then provides that amount to the Saskatchewan 
Snowmobile Association as that revenue is designated 
specifically for trail maintenance. 



April 23, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3975 

The proposed amendment would have SGI remit the revenue 
from snowmobile registrations directly to the snowmobile 
association instead of the GRF. It’s a more practical and timely 
allocation of these funds. The snowmobile association 
requested this change. SGI and the Ministry of Parks, Culture 
and Sport consulted with the SSA throughout the legislative 
review process. As I mentioned earlier, some of the members 
are here today, including their president, and are all fully in 
support of the change. They are here to see their efforts brought 
before their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Snowmobile 
Amendment Act, 2018. 
 
The Speaker: — Question before the Assembly is a motion by 
the minister that Bill No. 123, The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 
2018 be now read a second time. Pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to stand in my place to offer the initial comments of the 
Saskatchewan opposition. I want to point out . . . First of all I 
want to welcome the Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association 
and its president here today. I want to point out that over the 
years some of my involvement with the snowmobile 
association, I’ve always found the association to be very 
vigilant in their work, Mr. Speaker. They’ve been very 
professional in their organization. And they’ve also offered a lot 
of great advice to past governments and I continue seeing that 
kind of co-operation with the current snowmobile association as 
well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we obviously want to recognize the 
challenges that the snowmobile association deals with. We 
know that there are many, many challenges on an annual basis. 
They take time to understand how insurance works. They take 
time to understand the need to keep a lot of our snowmobile 
trails open for tourism opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know that some of the activity around the snowmobile 
industry, so to speak, offer a lot of benefit to a lot of the parts of 
rural Saskatchewan, whether it’s a hotel or whether it’s a 
restaurant, whether it’s a service station, that we see a lot of 
times the snowmobilers in general, when they start doing the 
trail runs or they start doing different events, different 
fundraising events, that the Snowmobile Association really does 
have an incredible value. And its members, Mr. Speaker, offer 
an incredible opportunity for rural Saskatchewan as they begin 
some of their annual treks and their annual snowmobile activity. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to first of all again thank the 
Snowmobile Association for their work. We know that they’ve 
done wonderful work in the past, as we’ve been exposed to 
some of their planning. We’ve been exposed to a lot of their 
ideas, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t want to name names of 
different executive directors that were there before because that 
would certainly date me, because it’s something that we don’t 
want to do. So I want to point out that, over time, that the 
Snowmobile Association has done an incredible amount of 
work. 
 
Now obviously this bill changes The Snowmobile Act, which 
allows for snowmobile registration fee revenues to flow to the 

Saskatchewan snowmobile fund. Mr. Speaker, snowmobile 
registration fee revenues will be received directly by the SSF 
[Saskatchewan snowmobile fund] and will no longer be 
received by the GRF and then appropriated to the SSF. So 
obviously, Mr. Speaker, this is something that the 
Saskatchewan snowmobile fund has been working towards. All 
I would say to them, on behalf of the official opposition, we just 
wanted to ask a few questions to allow the process to go 
through the House as I’m certain that over time we may have 
inquiries from different snowmobilers as to what the change 
may mean. 
 
So obviously again, as I pointed out, we want to commend the 
Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association for their great work. 
And one of the reasons why we look to legislation like this and 
take the opportunity to make contact with the association, take 
the opportunity to make contact with the different 
snowmobilers that are within the association, and just to ask a 
few questions to make sure that we’re aware of what their 
activity involves, what the snowmobilers themselves aspire for 
the industry. 
 
So it’s a great opportunity for us, as the opposition, to learn 
more about the Snowmobile Association to ask some of the 
questions that we need to ask. And, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s 
an important point that I would raise as I stand up and give our 
first comment as it pertains to this bill. 
 
[14:30] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve mentioned, the Snowmobile 
Association has been a wonderful addition, a great asset to our 
province. I want to continue working closely with them, but as I 
mentioned, there are a few questions and a bit of outreach that 
we want to do as an opposition just so we could learn more 
about what the Act wants to do and how this benefits the 
association overall. And also we have a few other questions 
about generally how the association works just so all the 
members on this side of the Assembly are fully up to speed as 
to the great work being done by the Snowmobile Association. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on that note I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 123, The Snowmobile (Fees) Amendment Act, 2018. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the minister . . . Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 124 — The Environmental Management and 
Protection (Environmental Handling Charges)  

Amendment Act, 2018 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, after some brief remarks 
I’ll move second reading of Bill No. 124, The Environmental 
Management and Protection Amendment Act, 2018. 
 
I’m pleased to have the opportunity to present amendments to 



3976 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2018 

The Environmental Management and Protection Act, or EMPA 
2010, as a budget bill. Environmental handling fee changes 
were announced in the government’s fee change news release 
on March 23rd. I’d like to take this opportunity to explain why 
these changes are so important for the sustainability of 
Saskatchewan’s beverage recycling program. 
 
Amendments to EMPA will enable an increase of 2 cents on the 
environmental handling charge for all recyclable beverage 
containers purchased in Saskatchewan. Environmental handling 
charges are an amount paid by the customer at the point of 
purchase. These charges are not returned when the deposit is 
refunded; rather they are used to fund the contract government 
holds with Sarcan to deliver the beverage container collection 
and recycling program. 
 
Specifically the new amounts proposed are: 5 cents for polycoat 
cartons or gable-top and shelf-stable aseptic containers — the 
most common example of these is milk containers, which were 
added to the recycling program in 2017; 7 cents for aluminum 
cans; 8 cents for plastic bottles and jugs; and 9 cents for glass 
bottles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, program sustainability is the core reason why 
amending EMPA 2010 and increasing the environmental 
handling charge at this time. Based on calculations of current 
funding and program costs, and with input from our recycling 
program operator Sarcan, the current handling charges will 
sustain the program until approximately 2024. Under these 
amendments, government will retain the total revenue generated 
by the 2 cent increase until renegotiation of the Sarcan grant 
agreement in 2020. This is the renewal period for the ministry’s 
four-year grant agreement with the Saskatchewan Association 
of Rehabilitation Centres, known as SARC, and its recycling 
division, Sarcan. Sarcan receives environmental handling 
charges based on container sales volumes from two years prior. 
This is why we’re increasing the fees now, so that the funds are 
available when the Sarcan contract is renewed. 
 
At the time of renewal in 2020, we are proposing that Sarcan 
would receive 1 cent from the handling charge increase, which 
would sustain the program until 2030. The additional 1 cent will 
allow for flexibility in the event that the beverage container 
program’s financial situation changes and offset the need for 
increased fees in the near future. It will also support 
administrative costs endured by government with respect to 
operating recycling and other waste management programs in 
the province. It is important to note, Mr. Speaker, that the 
environmental handling charge has not changed in 
Saskatchewan since 1992. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, this increase to beverage container 
handling charges will ensure the long-term sustainability of 
Sarcan recycling in Saskatchewan, which is one of the most 
successful recycling programs in Canada. Sarcan has helped 
divert 49 million pounds of materials from our landfills over the 
past eight years, and employs 600 people of all abilities. 
 
As mentioned, the proposed changes were announced on March 
23rd in the government’s fee change news release, effective 
April 1. Stakeholders were notified in March and Sarcan 
indicated its appreciation to the government for the increase. 
We’re confident that this amendment will provide the funding 

needed to sustain the successful program operated by Sarcan, 
which is such an important partner for government. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of the 
environmental management and protection amendment Act, 
2018. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 124, The Environmental 
Management and Protection (Environmental Handling 
Charges) Amendment Act, 2018 be now read a second time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize 
the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As with 
the previous bill, I am proud to stand in my place again to give 
the initial comments on behalf of the official opposition as it 
pertains to this bill, Bill 124, the environmental management 
and protection amendment Act. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I was going to give a brief history of what a 
lot of people in Saskatchewan already know, that Sarcan is one 
of the more promising agencies in the province of 
Saskatchewan and have been doing great work over the years. 
They are obviously to be commended. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what this bill does is it recognizes the fact 
that as a province and as a government, and certainly this has 
been practised in the past as well, is that as you look at the 
landfills throughout Saskatchewan, it makes a lot of sense to try 
and find the different ways in which you could reduce waste. 
We obviously look at the opportunity around a number of 
different products and we identify in the EMPA Act, Mr. 
Speaker, a way in which we can deal specifically with certain 
products. And a good example I would use, Mr. Speaker, is 
used tires. 
 
As we all know, we have a scrap tire association in 
Saskatchewan and they generally look after the tires that have 
been sent to the landfills. And, Mr. Speaker, they collect those 
tires and they use them for a variety of purposes, whether it’s 
recycled material for the playgrounds or whether it’s recycled 
for use on some asphalt cover on some of our highways. What 
these different associations do, Mr. Speaker, is that as we have 
the different streams of waste — I guess you can call it waste or 
items we throw in the garbage — it is important that we find a 
way in which we could recycle and reuse those materials. 
 
Another good example, Mr. Speaker, is obviously the beverage 
containers which this particular bill makes reference to. The 
problem we have, Mr. Speaker, is that you look at Sarcan. In 
general, it is a great organization, Mr. Speaker. And we just 
finished talking about the snowmobile association not more 
than several minutes ago, Mr. Speaker, and how we want to use 
a direct link to the associations that are doing very well and 
making sure that the revenues that we generate in one stream go 
to those that are intending to use it properly, and not having to 
go through governments. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is where the government sometimes 
gets things wrong. We think Sarcan should be having much the 
same kind of revenue stream and the ability to negotiate that 
revenue stream on income generated from that product, Mr. 



April 23, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3977 

Speaker. And by that I mean, and I use the example of the 
previous bill, of how the snowmobile association’s getting 
revenues directly from some of the, you know, some of the fees 
being collected by snowmobilers. 
 
Well in this instance, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing that the 
government is taking some of the revenues generated from the 
increase on the containers that are being identified in this 
particular bill. And we make reference to the juice boxes. The 
ministry uses the technical description of what a juice box is. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what we’re seeing is that this government is 
so broke that they’re now taxing juice boxes and they’re 
increasing these fees and they’re generating something like I 
believe it’s $18 million as a result of this particular exercise. 
But that 18 million is not going to Sarcan, Mr. Speaker. Some 
of that money is going to go into the revenues so that the 
Saskatchewan Party government could use it to pay for horrible 
land deals gone bad, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s important to note to the people of Saskatchewan just as 
an example, how we look at the different revenue streams 
through our landfill is actually a concept that the people in 
Sarcan brought forward many, many years ago. And different 
organizations were born from that process where Sarcan said, 
look, we’ll take all the beverage containers. We’ll take all the 
pop cans. And over years, over the years they expanded into 
used computer parts, Mr. Speaker. They expanded into the 
scrap tire association. 
 
So as we throw material into our landfills, different 
organizations have different uses for a particular product. And 
as I explained before, the scrap tire association will take the 
scrap tires and certainly the Sarcan folks will take a number of 
the other items in our landfills. And what that does, Mr. 
Speaker, it creates employment. What that does, Mr. Speaker, it 
reduces stress on our landfills. What that does, Mr. Speaker, it 
reuses products time and time again. So it’s very important to 
know that the concept generated around Sarcan was an 
amazingly progressive idea, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what we’re seeing is that this particular government is 
obviously trying to hitchhike or jump on the coattails of the 
success behind Sarcan and simply hide this fee hike under 
Sarcan’s guise. And they’re jacking up the fees for these juice 
boxes, generating $18 million. But, Mr. Speaker, Sarcan does 
not get that money. Sarcan does not get that money, and that’s 
one of the reasons why we have to take the time to see how 
these bills are impacting or affecting certain organizations and 
associations dedicated to making sure they remove as much of 
certain streams of waste from our landfills. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned in the past, this concept 
was working really well. There was a lot of opportunity for 
Sarcan to build on their success. There’s other organizations 
that might want to be part of the solution on other refuse 
streams, you know, if I could use that phrase. 
 
One of the good examples I’d use is paper, cardboard. A lot of 
the landfills are still being filled with a lot of the cardboard. Is 
there a revenue stream that we can generate from there? We 
understand that plastics continue to be a problem in our 
landfills, plastic bags. There’s been efforts on that front to 
reduce the use of plastic bags. I understand now as you shop in 

different stores, you’re paying a small fee for the plastic bags. 
And I’m assuming that some of that 5 cents that’s charged for 
plastic is going into ways in which we could reduce plastic in 
our landfills or find ways in which we could recycle and reuse 
some of the plastics. So it’s really a very exciting science, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As I’ve said before, the benefits of reducing volume of waste at 
our landfill is threefold. Not only is it important for the 
environment, Mr. Speaker. It also creates jobs. It also creates a 
number of jobs and it also, as I mentioned, allows innovation to 
come into play when we talk about reusing and recycling some 
of these products. 
 
But again as we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, this government is using 
the opportunity to tax juice boxes and increase some of the 
other fees in other areas. And the idea is that they would be 
generating $18 million from this exercise. That money is not 
going directly to Sarcan. It’s going into the government coffers 
again to cover up for their mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 
So on that note I know we have a lot more to say about this. We 
are excited about Sarcan’s future. As I said, the concept of 
identifying revenue streams for each product that is being 
placed in our landfills is a great idea. But we have to ask the 
questions of Sarcan, how does this affect your bottom line? 
How does this affect your performance? And that’s why we 
take the time to network and learn from the different 
organizations exactly how these fee hikes can hurt them or help 
them, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve seen the Saskatchewan Party 
hurt many organizations out there, again as a direct result of 
their scandal, mismanagement, and waste. 
 
So on that note, we’ll take the time to study the bill thoroughly, 
network with the different organizations that are impacted, and 
return with comments from my colleagues as we again embark 
down this trail of trying to understand what Bill 124 is going to 
do for our province. So on that note, I move that we adjourn 
debate on Bill 124. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 124, The Environmental 
Management and Protection (Environmental Handling 
Charges) Amendment Act, 2018. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 125 — The Saskatchewan Value-added  
Agriculture Incentive Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to move, at the conclusion of my remarks, second reading 
of Bill No. 125, The Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture 
Incentive Act. This legislation is new, Mr. Speaker, and is being 
introduced to improve investment attraction and retention 
outcomes in the province’s value-added agriculture sector. 
 
[14:45] 
 



3978 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2018 

Saskatchewan is feeding the world. The opportunities in food, 
crop, and beverage processing are as wide as our prairie sky. 
The benefit of this legislation is that it offers a 15 per cent 
non-refundable tax credit for value-added agriculture businesses 
that make a significant capital investment to expand production 
capacity. The incentive is designed to be used in addition to 
other existing incentives in Saskatchewan that an agri-food 
project could also conceivably qualify for. Mr. Speaker, rising 
to the challenges of a growing world population, Saskatchewan 
is an economic powerhouse within Canada. Our stable, 
competitive business climate is encouraging investments, 
especially in the agri-food sector. 
 
Saskatchewan’s diverse agri-food sector is world renowned for 
consistently supplying high-quality agricultural food and 
products. Saskatchewan has over 40 per cent of arable land in 
Canada and is a world leader in growing crops. While exports 
of the primary production helps to feed the world, we also want 
to expand our value-added processing right here at home. 
Businesses locating in Saskatchewan or expanding their 
production means more jobs, higher value exports, and 
economic growth right here in our province. And that’s why we 
need this legislation here today. It’s about keeping 
Saskatchewan on track by maintaining and growing our 
province as a land of opportunity for those eager to invest in the 
agri-food sector, and that’s what we plan to address with this 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act will position Saskatchewan as having a 
very attractive host of incentives for those companies looking to 
grow in our province. Qualifying projects will include new and 
existing value-added agricultural facilities with $10 million in 
new capital expenditures. To be eligible, a project must 
demonstrate that capital expenditures were made for the 
purpose of creating new productive capacity or increasing 
existing productive capacity. Redemption of the benefits is 
limited to 20 per cent in year 1 after the facility enters 
operation, 30 per cent in year 2, and 50 per cent in year 3. There 
is a maximum carry-forward of 10 years on any remaining 
credit amount. 
 
Mr. Speaker, robust economic growth and new investment in 
key sectors is crucial to Saskatchewan’s people and our 
communities. To accomplish this, we must continually find new 
ways to foster a competitive business environment in our 
province. Saskatchewan already offers significant advantages 
and opportunities for investment, and this incentive is 
specifically designed to help secure investments in large-scale 
expansions of value-added capacity at new and existing 
facilities. 
 
I’m confident, Mr. Speaker, that this bill is good for our 
province and it’s good for the agri-food sector. Mr. Speaker, I 
am pleased to move the second reading of The Saskatchewan 
Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading on 
Bill No. 125, The Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture 
Incentive Act. Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 
recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again it 
is my pleasure to stand in the House today to offer initial 

comments around Bill No. 125. And as the minister alluded to, 
this bill creates a 15 per cent non-refundable tax credit for 
value-added agricultural facilities on new capital investment, 
Mr. Speaker. And as I pointed out, Mr. Speaker, companies will 
be required to apply to the government for a SVAI 
[Saskatchewan value-added agriculture incentive], which is a 
certificate that clearly points out that to be eligible for that 
certificate you must at least invest $10 million in new capital 
and submit to inspections from government officials to ensure 
all the rules are being followed. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think if you look at some of the challenges 
around rural Saskatchewan . . . And we’ve had the opportunity 
to tour a number of farm operations in our time here. And I 
often tell folks that I’m from northern Saskatchewan and yes, 
while we did have the Silver Lake Farm and the central lake 
farm in Green Lake and we also had the cow-calf operations up 
in Ile-a-la-Crosse, my exposure to agriculture was somewhat 
limited prior to my engagement as an MLA. But over time, Mr. 
Speaker, as you spend more time in southern Saskatchewan, 
you understand the incredible value of agriculture overall. 
There’s no question that we have to do what we have to do to 
ensure that rural Saskatchewan, and therefore agriculture, 
continues being the backbone of our Saskatchewan economy. 
 
These are lessons that I’ve learned over time from my 
colleagues in the opposition benches, Mr. Speaker. And over 
time we have gone through a great amount of risks in the 
agricultural sector, and obviously risks such as mad cow 
disease, Mr. Speaker, that was an experience that Saskatchewan 
went through. There are a number of environmental threats that 
continue to create challenges in the food basket of the world 
which is of course the Prairie provinces and Saskatchewan is a 
big part of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as we look at some of the farm operations getting bigger 
and stronger . . . And, Mr. Speaker, the only issue that I 
sometimes try hard to understand is, where is the family farm in 
the scheme of things overall in this day and age? And there are 
many that think that, well the family farm numbers are 
dwindling. And as we see more and more corporate farms being 
established, you’ve often got to think, are we doing the right 
thing in terms of not focusing on the family farms? I think 
they’re a big part of the solution overall and it’s really, really 
important to see how we can strengthen the family farm, so to 
speak. 
 
And obviously the challenges of operating a family farm in this 
day and age is much radically different than 20, 30, 40 years 
ago. But, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that as we try and look 
at ways in which we can stimulate rural Saskatchewan and 
strengthen our agricultural base, Mr. Speaker, it is really, really 
difficult to understand why the government is not addressing 
some of the immediate threats to rural Saskatchewan and some 
of the immediate threats to our agricultural sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This particular bill, Mr. Speaker, it talks a bit about agricultural 
incentive, but as we’ve said again, and we’ve said time and time 
again on this side of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, some of the 
threats to the agricultural sector is water management. We see, 
as we travel rural Saskatchewan for a number of functions, that 
there are issues around drainage, Mr. Speaker. Illegal drainage 
has been going on for years and this particular government 



April 23, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3979 

refuses to handle some of the challenges around illegal 
drainage.  
 
We’ve got a problem, Mr. Speaker, with water management. 
Certain areas have too much water; other areas don’t have 
enough. And the fluctuations of water levels — some years 
we’re flooding; other years we are simply starving for moisture, 
Mr. Speaker. And it’s anybody’s guess where the challenges are 
for this year and every year thereafter. 
 
So every year as we grapple with water management, Mr. 
Speaker, it is the single most significant threat to the 
agricultural sector, and yet this particular government has no 
money set aside to deal with that issue and certainly no 
wherewithal to deal with the challenges around illegal drainage, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well while I’m on my feet, I want to talk about another 
significant challenge around agriculture and that’s getting our 
crops to market, Mr. Speaker. And as we see the challenges and 
risks around oil and gas and particularly the pipeline debate 
we’ve been having in this Assembly for the last number of 
days, we need to get our crops to market, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s another issue that this particular government has not been 
dealing with in a significant way. 
 
And yes, they may have $2 billion for a French conglomerate 
building a semicircle around the city of Regina but, Mr. 
Speaker, when it comes to water management, when it comes to 
getting our crops to markets, when it comes to mitigating 
environmental risks that threaten our rural way of life and 
threaten the backbone of our province, Mr. Speaker, you begin 
to wonder where their priorities are. 
 
And that’s one of the reasons why we pay very close attention 
to bills of this sort that come forward, to say, do they address 
these matters? While there’s incentives on value-added, Mr. 
Speaker, we are still seeing a huge hole in the challenges and 
the immediate and pressing risks to the agricultural sector, and 
as I mentioned, everything from water management, getting our 
crops to market, and some of the environmental risks that many 
parts of rural Saskatchewan face. 
 
So it’s important to allow people to come forward to share with 
us their concerns around this. It’s important to see which groups 
are going to be benefiting from this particular bill. And that’s 
why it’s important to network, and it’s important for us to allow 
the bill to proceed through the Assembly so we’re able to find 
these questions out before it’s being proclaimed. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 125, The Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture 
Incentive Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 125, The Saskatchewan Value-added 
Agriculture Incentive Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 104 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 104 — The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017/Code des droits de 
la personne de la Saskatchewan de 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure and 
honour to finally have the opportunity to rise in my chair and 
add my thoughts to Bill No. 104, the Saskatchewan human 
rights amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, this bill largely . . . In 
terms of changes, what it seeks to do is create a bilingual 
version of this bill which is great because we’re talking about 
making the Human Rights Commission in the form of its 
legislation more accessible by allowing for a bilingual bill, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And it does provide us the opportunity to be able to speak to the 
human rights legislation and human rights in Saskatchewan and 
what we could be doing better as a province and what we could 
be doing better as legislators. And I have enjoyed reviewing the 
commentary by my colleagues who have had the opportunity to 
wade into this debate and discuss this bill, and in particular my 
colleague from Saskatoon Centre who is our human rights critic 
and who has an expertise in this area, Mr. Speaker, and has 
been working very closely with many different groups in 
Saskatchewan on human rights and how we could be improving 
human rights in the province. 
 
And I thank him. I want to take this opportunity to thank him on 
the record for his hard work and his passion in all that he does 
in all areas, but in particular in this critic role. We have the 
pleasure of working together as sort of joint critics on this file, 
and it’s always been a really great opportunity to see how the 
member from Saskatoon Centre works with different groups in 
the province and is an advocate for them and helps to amplify 
their voice in the space that we’ve been given. 
 
This bill also makes several changes to the language throughout 
the Act, but it doesn’t change the content of the code. For 
example, there are some “ifs” that are changed to “wheres.” 
There’s “shall enjoy the right to” has been changed to “has the 
right to.” It’s not overly onerous from our interpretation of the 
changes that have been made. It doesn’t create any sort of 
additional power or additional obligation. 
 
But there are some . . . There’s one challenge here that I want to 
take the opportunity today to talk about, is that this was a bit of 
a lost opportunity, Mr. Speaker. It’s great that there is now a 
bilingual version or there will be a bilingual version of this Act, 
but there are other concerns around the Human Rights 
Commission and human rights in Saskatchewan that we need to 
ensure that we’re addressing. In particular what we’ve been 
hearing is that the number of complaints coming forward to the 
Human Rights Commission have been increasing over time, 



3980 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2018 

Mr. Speaker, and there’s also a growing number of human 
rights complaints that have been dismissed. We’re very worried 
about these trends. 
 
And I know the changes that have been made to the Human 
Rights Commission over the past several years have resulted in 
there no longer being an automatic lawyer assigned to the case 
of a complainant. So the Human Rights Commission used to 
have lawyers on staff that would essentially act for an 
individual who’s making a complaint. That doesn’t exist 
anymore and now those complainants are encouraged to find, if 
they want to take their case to a level of court, to find their own 
private counsel for that issue. Often folks who are dealing 
within human rights issues are those of somewhat a vulnerable 
segment in society, Mr. Speaker, and may or may not have the 
means to hire counsel, especially when those cases could . . . I 
would say it’s probably a minimum amount would be $10,000 
of a retainer to be able to hire private counsel to deal with your 
human rights matter. 
 
So even though the amount of complaints are increasing, we’re 
worried about what’s happening to those complaints once 
they’re made and whether or not the outcomes that are being 
achieved are of the satisfaction of those who are participating in 
that system, Mr. Speaker. And that’s one thing we want to make 
sure that we’re ensuring. 
 
The minister when he talked about this bill, he talked about how 
this legislation seeks to promote and protect individual dignity 
and equality rights. And we need to ensure that this legislation 
and this commission stays intact and is doing the duty that it 
should be. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And I do want to give credit to Judge Arnot, who is the Chief 
Commissioner at the Human Rights Commission, for the work 
that he’s done in particular with respect to education and his 
advocacy work around promoting civil ethics and civic duty to 
the schools. And he’s actually created — I don’t know if you’ve 
seen it, Mr. Speaker — but he’s created a comprehensive 
curriculum around this and is working to promote the 
implementation of that in the education system in 
Saskatchewan. And from what I understand, it’s received 
accolades for its strength in other places, Mr. Speaker. So I do 
want to commend the commissioner and all of his staff for their 
work on that in particular, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are still a lot of issues that we need to ensure that we’re 
being diligent on in Saskatchewan. And in particular we see a 
lot of challenges around people in the trans community 
receiving proper access to health care. That’s a challenge we 
hear about, I know when we’re at events, almost at least 
annually, and the rates of suicide as a result of not being able to 
access proper health care in the trans community are 
exponential on top of that. There is still a large level of stigma 
and a large level of misunderstanding around those who are in 
that community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we as legislators should be doing everything we can to 
amplify their voices because they are the leaders in that area 
and doing everything we can to support them as allies, Mr. 
Speaker. And whenever we’re talking about The Saskatchewan 

Human Rights Code I want to make sure that we’re taking that 
opportunity to talk about it. Because I know my colleague from 
Saskatoon Centre would be wanting me to make sure that I’m 
taking that opportunity to speak about that, speak about the 
importance of these issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s also been a lot of push lately around ensuring that the 
language we’re using is gender neutral. We’ve been talking a 
lot previously and the conversation hasn’t been as adamant as it 
was a few years back about the importance of gender-neutral 
washrooms and how some folks don’t feel comfortable in a 
gendered washroom, Mr. Speaker. So ensuring that we’re doing 
all we can, again of being cognizant of the challenges in 
different segments of the population, ensuring we’re doing as 
much as we can as legislators to listen, to understand those 
challenges and to determine if there’s anything that we can do 
as legislators to make our community safer and those within our 
community more supported, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m looking forward to having the opportunity to ask questions 
of the minister about many different issues with respect to the 
Human Rights Code, although I’m largely not opposed to the 
bill being bilingual, again it gives us the opportunity to talk 
more about different things within the Human Rights 
Commission. 
 
So with that, I’m looking forward to having that opportunity 
again, Mr. Speaker, and I’m prepared to allow this bill to move 
forward. 
 
The Speaker: — Okay, the question before the Assembly is a 
motion by the member that Bill No. 104, The Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Code, 2017 be now read a second time. Pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 104, The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017 be committed to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to The Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 105 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 105 — The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 



April 23, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3981 

rise today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 105, The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 
2017. I just had the opportunity to speak to Bill 104, which is, I 
guess, the non-consequential amendment Act, and it makes 
logical sense for both of these bills to go to committee together. 
 
This bill makes, as per the name of the bill, consequential 
amendments to The Saskatchewan Employment Act, as a result 
of the changes that are made in Bill 104, and the sections of the 
employment Act that once referred to the Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Code will now say the Human Rights Code 2017, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And since I’m on my feet talking about the Human Rights 
Code, I think it’s important to talk a little bit about the Human 
Rights Commission that does good work. And I think . . . I’m 
looking at, Mr. Speaker, the annual report 2016-2017 that has 
some very interesting numbers that I want to make sure that I 
read into the record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The number of complaints that were made to the Human Rights 
Commission in 2016-2017 were 444, with 141 of those 
complaints being formalized. The number of 
employment-related complaints were 122, and that was 87 per 
cent of the complaints that were made, which is interesting, Mr. 
Speaker. So the majority, and I can almost say the vast majority 
of the complaints that are made are employment-related 
complaints. 
 
And I do believe — if I remember correctly the last time I 
talked to Judge Arnot about the Human Rights Commission — 
there is now a line, a direct line that can be called or utilized for 
employers if they have questions. So the Human Rights 
Commission is trying to be proactive in the work that they’re 
doing. They don’t want things to get to the complaint stage. So 
if an employer has a question about something, whether or not 
it may or may not be in violation of the Human Rights Code, or 
they’re curious about what their obligation as employers are in 
a specific circumstance, they can actually now proactively call 
the Human Rights Commission and receive an answer in a 
timely fashion, Mr. Speaker. And when 87 per cent of the 
complaints that are made to the Human Rights Commission are 
employment related, that’s a really positive step. 
 
And now I just see the line that I was just talking about actually 
is the next number that’s in the annual report; it’s the business 
line inquiries. They received 451 inquiries through the business 
line, which is an increase of 16 per cent from the year prior, Mr. 
Speaker. So they actually received more inquiries than they did 
complaints in 2016-2017. And that’s a positive step to see the 
Human Rights Commission being proactive in these things. 
 
What’s very interesting is the amount of telephone and email 
inquiries that they received in total, Mr. Speaker, in this year, 
which is 1,672, which is quite a few, Mr. Speaker. So I’m 
curious to know how their funding structure has been, if they’ve 
been able to receive any new FTEs [full-time equivalent] lately 
as a result of the work that they’ve been doing. Because you can 
tell that the demand is certainly there. And we want to ensure 
that those employees are supported and not burnt-out, because 
they are likely hearing a lot of very difficult stories of people 
that are in very difficult places in their lives, which can be a 
very high-stress work environment. We want to ensure that 

they’re properly supported. 
 
The amount of complaints that were settled in 2016-2017 are 
122, Mr. Speaker, and then with 23 settled at direct mediation 
and 99 of those settled at pre-complaint mediation, 
investigation, and systemic advocacy stage. So these are all 
ones that did not end up going to court. So I’m curious to know, 
if there was 141 complaints formalized and 122 complaints that 
were settled, my math is not great but I think that’s about 19 
that are left to be spoken for. Mr. Speaker, I’m curious to know 
what happened to those other 19, whether or not they were 
successful through trial or whether — and by successful I mean 
actually made their way to trial — or if the complaints were 
simply dropped, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know that the Human Rights Commission has moved 
recently from . . . or not recently, but I’d say over the last seven 
or eight years; I forget when the big change happened in that 
office from pushing folks through tribunals and then the court. 
But to focus more on mediation, which is oftentimes . . . Well I 
don’t want to say oftentimes. Which can be beneficial for 
complainants if the circumstance is appropriate for mediation. 
I’m curious to know if there’s feedback that’s sought after a 
complaint is settled, whether or not the complainants were 
satisfied with the outcome, were happy that the settlement had 
occurred, and received the outcome that they had desired, Mr. 
Speaker, because it is important. 
 
The other problem, I guess the other challenge around moving 
towards more mediated settlements is we don’t have the body 
of case law that we used to have in this type of area. 
Saskatchewan was actually a leader in terms of case law for 
human rights issues. The Whatcott decision came from 
Saskatchewan, which is a huge decision, Mr. Speaker. And 
while I don’t want to see individuals’ personal circumstances 
and their complaints and the difficulties around them to be 
utilized just for the purpose of strong case law, Mr. Speaker, 
because that can be a very difficult process for an individual 
emotionally and literally and financially to go through, there’s 
also still some benefit for that case law to exist. 
 
And when issues are mediated or settled, then it’s a bit more 
difficult for us to have precedents, to be able to ensure that there 
is a systemic . . . or that we’re able to know where our markers 
are, so to speak, Mr. Speaker, so that when other folks are going 
through a similar circumstance they sort of know where their 
marker is in terms of this issue. 
 
So that would be the challenge I would call up when we start 
moving towards more mediated settlements. Again, the focus 
should be on the complainants and what the complainants want, 
and if the outcome they have received is desirable for the 
complainants. So it’s important to have that discussion as well, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with that, I again look forward to having the opportunity to 
ask questions of the minister and his officials at committee. I 
always enjoy the opportunity to be at committee with the 
Minister of Justice, Mr. Speaker, and the officials from that 
ministry. And so as such, I am prepared to allow this bill to 
move to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 



3982 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2018 

by the minister that Bill 74, The Evidence Amendment Act . . . 
Sorry, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 105, The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 
2017 be committed to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 121 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 121 — The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks. Mr. Speaker, today I’m 
entering into discussion here today around Bill No. 121, the 
cannabis control Act, and it’s my pleasure to do so. 
 
I’ve gone through the minister’s statements that’s he’s put on 
the record here, Mr. Speaker. I think that there’s still a lot more 
information that Saskatchewan people are looking for across 
our province, be that our municipalities or be that entrepreneurs 
across Saskatchewan, be that our police forces, Mr. Speaker. 
But clearly the . . . On this file, this is a file that this government 
really has dragged their feet. We are now the last province to be 
getting our act together on the front in response to the changes 
around cannabis, and there’s no valid reason for that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[15:15] 
 
It’s not as though the Sask Party was out consulting with 
Saskatchewan people in a meaningful way on this front, Mr. 
Speaker. So that’s not the excuse for the delay on this front and 
the dragging of the feet. It’s not as though the Sask Party and 
this Premier were out consulting municipalities across our 
province because we’ve heard clearly, Mr. Speaker, that that 
hasn’t happened either. 
 
We’ve heard clearly from our municipal leaders that that 
engagement, that consultation, that working together, just 
simply hasn’t happened, Mr. Speaker. And that’s too bad, 
because I believe there’s a lot to be gained by working together, 
a lot to be gained by understanding that our municipal partners 
have direct impacts, direct knowledge on this front, all of which 

would have built a stronger piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is, you know, a government that also has certainly dragged 
its feet, that hasn’t consulted Saskatchewan people, and they 
haven’t consulted police forces across this province in an 
adequate way as well, Mr. Speaker. So certainly that’s not the 
reason for the delay in the legislation, the reason that we as a 
province are the last province in Canada to bring about 
legislation on this front and get our framework together, get the 
regulations in order, Mr. Speaker. And that’s too bad. 
 
What this represents is a failure to assure Saskatchewan people 
on areas like safety that are important to the people of our 
province. It’s also a failure to recognize that we have an 
industry that’s being developed in Canada, a failure to 
recognize the economic opportunities that exist within that 
industry, a failure to do our part within our province to make 
sure that we have the jobs and revenues and opportunities for 
small businesses within our province that they so deserve, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You know, when I think of our province . . . I mean, we’re a 
world-class producer. We’ve got the finest producers in all the 
world, Mr. Speaker, and I see here an opportunity to grow a 
product in a controlled way, in a way that ensures integrity, Mr. 
Speaker. And what I see is a lost opportunity because of the 
inaction of the Sask Party on this front to bring about legislation 
and then regulation to allow our growers, our producers, small 
businesses across our province, to be able to step up to the plate 
and create the kind of jobs that Saskatchewan people deserve. 
 
And it’s a file like this, Mr. Speaker, that really frustrates me 
because we had the chance for Saskatchewan to lead on this 
front. So we’ve had a Premier that has dragged his feet, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s put us in a circumstance where there’s many 
valid questions around things like safety, Mr. Speaker, around 
the supports that should be there and the understanding and 
relationship that needs to be there with municipalities across our 
province, the relationship that needs to be there with our police 
forces across this province. 
 
And this dragging of the feet has certainly already cost 
Saskatchewan people on the economic front — an 
unprecedented new opportunity, with an industry being 
developed and a chance for Saskatchewan to punch well above 
our weight to ensure that we have a system with integrity and 
that our producers, our growers, have tremendous opportunities 
within this front. 
 
It’s obviously critically important that the system we build has 
integrity to it, Mr. Speaker. And working with our world-class 
producers, with growers within our province, we had the 
opportunity and have the opportunity, I hope, to produce the 
best product with integrity of that system and with a tracking 
system, Mr. Speaker, from seed to sale, Mr. Speaker. And we 
just don’t see those sorts of measures being brought forward 
here yet. The age has been set around 19 years of age, and 
certainly on that front I’m supportive of that piece. 
 
We know that big questions still exist around things like the 
enforceability of the zero-tolerance policy around driving, Mr. 
Speaker, and this is important. We need to make sure our roads 
are safe. We need to make sure that our police forces have the 



April 23, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3983 

. . . and police across our province have the tools that they need 
to enforce the law. And there’s a real void on that front in what 
the members are saying opposite and what’s happening on the 
ground. And there’s a concern by many that the rules around 
ensuring that drivers aren’t impaired may not be enforceable, 
and this is a government that seems to be absent from this very 
important conversation, one that relates to safety all across our 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve also heard concerns around the enforceability and the 
legality of the position around transportation, Mr. Speaker. And 
again it’s a challenge if you have a government ramming 
forward without consulting and bringing forward legislation 
without consulting those who understand the realities on the 
ground and leave them in limbo in responding to the new 
realities that will exist after cannabis is legalized, Mr. Speaker. 
And I think that’s the frustration for many municipalities, for 
police forces, for entrepreneurs, and producers across our 
province, is that so many are left without a level of certainty, 
without being consulted at a time where we have the 
legalization actually occurring very soon. 
 
And this should be no surprise for the Sask Party that this is 
happening. This was a clear commitment of the federal 
government. And every other province in Canada has stepped 
up to the plate and brought forward legislation, and I think in 
many cases, has done much more meaningful consultation with 
the stakeholders within their respective provinces. 
 
And I guess it shouldn’t surprise me, Mr. Speaker, that on this 
piece of legislation and on the development of this new industry 
and this economic opportunity, Mr. Speaker, that the Sask Party 
didn’t consult, because they don’t have much time for that on 
many of the other files as well, Mr. Speaker — certainly not 
how they’ve gone at supporting classrooms and in their case, 
not supporting classrooms, Mr. Speaker. This is a government 
that doesn’t have it in them to consult, far too often, the good 
people of this province. It’s certainly evident here. 
 
I want to speak as well to the piece around revenues, Mr. 
Speaker. Certainly we should . . . We see a government that’s 
going to be collecting revenues. They’re going to be flowing 
into coffers of this government. And we won’t get in here right 
now to all of the mismanagement of this government, but we 
know they’re surfing through the couch cushions on any given 
day looking for any last loonie or toonie, loose change that’s 
out there, Mr. Speaker. We know that this is a government that 
mismanaged to the point that they’re now breaking promises 
around what they would sell off or not sell off and looking to, 
far too often, sell out Saskatchewan people in the sell-off of 
public assets, Mr. Speaker, to try to pay the bill for their 
mismanagement. 
 
And certainly there’s going to be revenues derived through the 
legalization of cannabis. And I found it interesting that other 
provinces have been able to account for that, been able to plan 
for that to the best of their ability, and then able to allocate 
dollars to respond to the pressures that exist within in a 
province. But not this government, Mr. Speaker. They certainly 
have, you know, the money that’s going to be flowing in 
because of the legalization, Mr. Speaker, but certainly we don’t 
see any of those dollars being directed in the ways that they 
should be, Mr. Speaker. 

And you know, I looked, as an example here, this is a 
government that’s collected a lot of money on the recent 
licence, the RFP [request for proposal] or the licensing process, 
where potential retailers across the provinces ponied up and put 
forward dollars, Mr. Speaker. And it’s not an insignificant sum 
— I believe over a million dollars — that’s now been collected 
in that licensing process alone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now you would think, Mr. Speaker, that in a case like that, Mr. 
Speaker, that those dollars may be dedicated directly to 
municipalities within our province who are right now going 
through significant planning and preparation for the 
legalization, Mr. Speaker. And certainly that comes at some 
cost to municipalities and police forces across our province. But 
this government has dedicated not a dime of those million 
dollars plus, Mr. Speaker, from their windfall through their 
licensing lottery, Mr. Speaker, and that seems strange. 
 
I also . . . It seems strange, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the 
inadequate support for mental health and addictions services 
within our province, that you don’t see this government using 
this opportunity to step up and to dedicate revenues from this 
new industry, Mr. Speaker, to better respond to the mental 
health needs and addictions challenges of Saskatchewan people 
right now. In fact, in this budget that was brought forward we 
saw a very marginal increase, a very, a tiny fraction of an 
increase being brought forward by this government when it 
comes to mental health. And if we look at the lived reality for 
those with mental health challenges across our province, if we 
look at the harsh realities facing so many when it comes to 
addictions within our province, we owe it to everyone in this 
province to do so much better. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that when we put $1 into effective 
mental health and addictions services that we actually save $7, 
Mr. Speaker, in greater health care costs. So what we have the 
opportunity to do by better responding to the mental health and 
addictions challenges of Saskatchewan people is to save lives, 
to make a difference, to ensure peace of mind and security to 
many across our province, but to also save dollars, Mr. Speaker, 
to save dollars down the road, Mr. Speaker, and of course then 
putting us in a position to better utilize those dollars as well. Far 
too many people within our province are suffering in silence, 
Mr. Speaker. Far too many aren’t provided the services and 
supports they need when they need them, when they step up and 
say that they need help. 
 
You know, and I see it all the time within our community. I see 
it across the province; I hear from so many. And we see the 
tragic reality, Mr. Speaker, of not stepping up and providing the 
services and supports when people need them when it comes to 
mental health and addictions services. The fact of the matter is 
that when someone indicates that they need some help on this 
front, Mr. Speaker, we need to do all we can to wrap around 
services and supports at that moment in time and provide some 
care and support to families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The consequence of having people wait three weeks or five 
weeks or two months or three months isn’t good enough and the 
consequences are real. Far too often that window of opportunity 
to provide some intervention and some support closes, Mr. 
Speaker. Far too often by that point circumstances have often 
hardened and worsened and people are in a different place 



3984 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2018 

within their mind, Mr. Speaker. Far too often families are torn 
apart. Far too often workers lose employment, Mr. Speaker. Far 
too often we’re losing young ones throughout our province. 
 
So I see an important connection on this front. From my 
perspective, we have new revenues that are going to be derived 
out of the sale of cannabis, out of the legalization of cannabis. I 
believe there’s a very important place for support and allocation 
of those dollars. Certainly we need to support our municipalities 
and our police forces for the costs and the changes that they’re 
going through on this front, from the work that they’re going to 
be doing to ensure safety, Mr. Speaker, and integrity of the 
system that’s brought forward. But this is an opportunity to step 
up to the plate, step up to the challenge when it comes to mental 
health and addictions services within our province, and a real 
failed opportunity by this government. 
 
So the fact of the matter is that the Sask Party of course hasn’t 
consulted Saskatchewan people in a genuine way that 
Saskatchewan people deserve on this front. The Sask Party has 
delayed bringing this together and not consulted the direct 
stakeholders, and that impacts matters like safety. It impacts the 
potential integrity of this system. It impacts our ability to have a 
system that’s going to be effective in place as legalization rolls 
around here, Mr. Speaker. And it fails to allow Saskatchewan 
people and entrepreneurs the ability to fully capture the 
economic benefit that exists by way of a new industry being 
created. And as I’ve said, we have the finest growers in the 
world, the finest producers in the world, and it’s a shame that 
the province of Saskatchewan would drag its heels and not 
allow a maximization of the economic benefits and jobs that 
could be created on this front. 
 
And building a system that should be the best in the world, Mr. 
Speaker, to ensure the integrity of a system from seed to sale 
when it comes to cannabis, Mr. Speaker. And as well making 
sure that we have assurances and commitments and plans and 
actions from the federal government to respond to the question 
of edibles, Mr. Speaker, but also, very importantly, Mr. 
Speaker, to make sure that those that need medical marijuana 
across the province, medical cannabis, CBD [cannabidiol], Mr. 
Speaker, that they have access. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Because there is a valid concern that exists right now that those 
that need to utilize medical cannabis, Mr. Speaker, with CBD, 
Mr. Speaker, for medical purposes, may get squeezed out of the 
market, Mr. Speaker, when this new industry develops and 
questions of what the supply will be. And this is an important 
place for a province to certainly work with a federal 
government to ensure that there’s going to be commitments for 
supply around CBD, around medical marijuana, as we see a 
tremendous growth — as we will — with THC 
[tetrahydrocannabinol] growth within the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I’m disappointed on this front with the Sask Party. I’m 
disappointed that they’ve failed to step up to the plate and 
engage people all across our province and stakeholders, to 
ensure the safety and the peace of mind that people deserve. I’m 
disappointed that they ran roughshod once again over the 
perspectives of municipalities within our province, that they 

failed to consult the police forces and the policing community 
within our province who have very real concerns around the 
enforceability of measures being brought forward and many of 
the changes that are being brought forward. 
 
And I have a whole lot of concerns that as a new industry was 
being developed in Canada, that this government sat on its 
hands and dragged its feet instead of stepping up to the plate to 
ensure that we could maximize the economic benefits for 
Saskatchewan people in this industry, that we could punch well 
above our weight to ensure the development of new businesses, 
new opportunities, be the finest grower in the world, Mr. 
Speaker, if you will, with craft growers, the potential for craft 
growers within our province that’s simply second to none. And 
the cost of that are certainly revenues to the province of 
Saskatchewan that are, you know, certainly desperately needed, 
you know, by way of our classrooms and by way of our mental 
health system, Mr. Speaker, but also really failed to ensure the 
opportunity was fully captured on the front by way of jobs, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
At a time within our province where far too many 
Saskatchewan people are struggling with underemployment and 
with job loss, this is a government that sat on its hands as an 
opportunity presented for us to develop an industry with 
integrity and create jobs all across our province. 
 
So with that being said, Mr. Speaker, we’ll certainly continue to 
be engaged on this important file. We’ll be working of course to 
ensure safety across our province. We’ll be working to ensure 
that the system that’s brought forward has integrity, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ll be working to make sure that the economic 
opportunities are fully captured for the people of our province, 
Mr. Speaker. And we’ll be working to make sure that folks like 
our municipalities and our police forces have the supports that 
they need. 
 
And then very importantly, as I was speaking about mental 
health and addictions services, Mr. Speaker, and the . . . 
inadequate doesn’t quite describe the reality that’s going on 
within our province, but the inadequate response that exists for 
mental health support and addictions within our province. We 
should be utilizing this opportunity to be making the 
investments now to build the kind of mental health and 
addictions services that all Saskatchewan people deserve, with 
immediate wraparound supports when people need them, when 
they indicate, Mr. Speaker, that they need some help, and doing 
so in a culturally affirmed way, in a way that responds to these 
needs and pressures, you know, with the appropriate difference 
in different parts of our province, with the diversity of our 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But again this is a government that hasn’t stepped up to the 
plate on this front, so we’ll be engaged on this front. At this 
point I’ll adjourn debate on Bill No. 121, the cannabis control 
Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 121, The Cannabis Control 
(Saskatchewan) Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



April 23, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3985 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 122 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 122 — The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2018/Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi 
intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I enter in here 
with . . . to discussion as it relates to Bill No. 122. This bill 
simply brings the consequential amendments required from Bill 
No. 121 that I just spoke to at relative length, Mr. Speaker, so I 
won’t go into the same sort of length that I did with respect to 
Bill 121. 
 
Certainly it’s very important that the Saskatchewan government 
gets it right when it comes to cannabis legalization. It’s 
disappointing that they have dragged their heels, Mr. Speaker, 
and that we’re now the last province in Canada to enact 
legislation and ensure a regulatory environment that works for 
Saskatchewan people or for our constituents, Mr. Speaker. And 
it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that this government start listening 
on this front to the stakeholders across our province, to those 
that are working in law enforcement and policing, to 
municipalities within our province, to entrepreneurs and those 
on the economic front, Mr. Speaker, and importantly, to all 
people as it relates to safety. 
 
And it’s certainly been clear that when it comes to the 
legalization, Mr. Speaker, that this government simply hasn’t 
consulted municipalities. And it’s disappointing, but it 
shouldn’t be a real surprise because we’ve seen that with this 
government far too often in recent years, Mr. Speaker. Of 
course I don’t need to reference the blindsiding of 
municipalities in last year’s budget with the tearing back of 
contracts and dollars from municipalities, and now the hard 
consequences that Saskatchewan people and property tax payers 
are subjected to. 
 
We’ll be engaged in this discussion. We have been across our 
province. Our critic has been a leader when it comes to a 
discussion as well around pardons, Mr. Speaker, and I urge the 
Sask Party to be more co-operative on that front and apply some 
common sense. But at this point in time, I’ll adjourn debate for 
Bill No. 122. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 122, The Cannabis Control 
(Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2018. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 107 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Makowsky that Bill No. 107 — The 
Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in, and I 
guess give some comments on Bill 107, The Provincial 
Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2017. I guess originally 
looking at it, I’m going to need to give some credit to the Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum. And I want to give credit to them 
because they did quite the work to consult many of our 
Saskatchewan citizens. Like I mean, if you look at it and I’m 
curious . . . Maybe the government could take a lesson from 
them when it comes to duty to consult and accommodate 
residents of our province. And I’m thinking about First Nations, 
Métis, but all residents whether they’re rural or, you know, 
urban, remote, it doesn’t matter. I think sometimes . . . I give 
them credit. 
 
Because when I initially looked at this — it is, it is something, I 
think — as it’s indicated in part of the information, we’re the 
only province to, you know, to actually enact legislation that 
will have, you know, a T. rex as our official fossil emblem for 
the province. And I mean that’s great. But what’s interesting, 
and I think there was a number of them, there were seven that 
people could vote, choose from, and you go through that 
process. Again I have to give them credit. I mean, I was reading 
through it and I’m going, not only could you go right to the 
museum and vote, you could actually . . . There was a video 
process you could take part and vote in. You could go online 
and vote. Like I mean, there was so many ways to engage the 
public and Saskatchewan residents in sharing information. 
 
And I think on this side of the House we have said that, and 
we’ve heard that on many doorsteps and places, where you hear 
a lot of frustration from people saying, how come the 
government doesn’t consult enough? And I just want to give 
them credit because in this, you know, I give them credit, the 
work they’ve done to figure out who they wanted to . . . Again, 
I go back. The government could take a lesson from this, and I 
hope they might actually get some information from . . . It’s 
very close to here, you know. They just have to walk over there, 
a few of them, and get some information. 
 
But I guess in some ways I’m being a little sarcastic to the 
government, but I want to give credit to, of course, the process 
and the selection. And I know the government, you know, is 
going to pass the legislation. They have the members to do that. 
But we get a chance to go over the conversation and support 
this, I guess, as the opposition. And sometimes these bills are 
easily . . . We work together in mutual . . . and sometimes 
respect. As the Speaker has pointed out, you know, more of that 
would be great in this Legislative Assembly: co-operation, 
working together. We all have our issues. 
 
But more importantly I guess, I was going to have a little bit 
more. And I said, well when you seen this originally and 
saying, okay it’s going to be our official fossil emblem for the 
province, I’m like, I wasn’t sure T. rex. And then, my grandkids 
love T. rex. And I mean, as they were growing up they had all 
the little, you know, dinosaurs that you may have and they 
would play with them. And that was, of course, always the 



3986 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2018 

powerful one, was the T. rex. And I mean kids can maybe show 
us how to get along in that scenario, as you’ve made comments 
here. So I was doing a little chuckling to myself thinking about 
just the grandkids and the way they played back and forth with 
T. rex. 
 
But I don’t want to take a lot of time. I just want to give credit 
for the process, those that took part in this voting. And they 
were given so many different options and opportunities to vote 
and have their say, you know. And that’s something again I’ll 
go back to saying: people in our province love to have their say. 
And I think it’s a right. They demand that they should have 
their say when government’s making moves and changing 
legislation or implementing changes on them that they’re not 
aware of. And they find out later, people are not happy. 
 
So here we have a heck of a very good progress. I’m really 
impressed. So on that, I’ll support this, you know, in the sense 
of moving forward. And I will have more questions, maybe. I 
don’t know how many questions we’ll have in committee. But 
at this point, I know I don’t have further comments about, you 
know, this legislation, the bill, on Bill 107. At this point I’m 
prepared to adjourn debate on this. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Cumberland has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 107, The Provincial Emblems and 
Honours Amendment Act, 2017. Pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 110 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 110 — The 
Animal Protection Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Yes. It’s a 
pleasure to rise today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 110, 
An Act respecting the Protection of Animals and making 
consequential amendments to certain Acts. And so this is an 
overhaul of The Animal Protection Act and I have to say, this is 
one I find very interesting. We all have connections with the 
animal world in some way, whether it’s through pets or 
livestock. 
 
And I have to say one of my highlights as an MLA had to do 
with this Act. Some people may remember this in November of, 
I think, 2009 when we had nine service dogs here. And I don’t 
know if people remember that day where I had a private 
member’s bill. It was about protecting service animals. 
 
And so we had these nine dogs come in the House, and security 
wanted to know what was going on with all these dogs. And, 
Mr. Speaker, sometimes you wonder about when we get carried 
away. These dogs didn’t really tolerate a lot of . . . We were 
pretty much on our good behaviour with all these dogs in the 
House. 
 

I do have to say though that it was an interesting thing that 
happened with that bill. People often don’t say, or they say we 
don’t . . . [inaudible] . . . decides the House. Do you remember 
that? I don’t know. It was really an interesting . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes, 2009 I brought forward a private 
members’ bill. 
 
But the neat thing that happened was Bob Bjornerud was the 
minister of Agriculture at the time, and he had before us a bill 
about protecting animals, The Animal Protection Act. That was 
last time, 2010. And I had heard about this bill from Manitoba 
via Washington State. It was called, Layla’s Law, about 
protecting service animals. And we were able to just roll it into 
the Minister of Agriculture’s bill before the House, and it is 
part 4. 
 
[15:45] 
 
But it was quite a day when we had all of these dogs here. Some 
people may remember it, but it was quite a time. And the deal 
was if I could bring four dogs, we would work with it, and we 
had nine. So it was pretty special. So we can make things work 
in this House, even if we use . . . I guess, is that exploiting 
dogs? They really earned their pay that day to make that point, 
but it was really something. And I have to hand it to . . . This 
was a testimony of how we could work together. It was a good 
idea. 
 
And I won’t take credit for the idea myself. It was something 
that the police were very interested in. They didn’t bring their 
dogs here though. They felt it was best not to bring their police 
dogs into the building. But they were here. But also the folks 
who are living with blindness brought their dogs, and that kind 
of thing. And it was really pretty special to see how quickly we 
can move together when a good idea emerges, and that was the 
case. And so that’s what we often do is we bring ideas, and the 
police really jumped on it. The disabilities community thought 
it was a great idea, and therefore we brought that together and it 
was part 4. 
 
And I have to hand it to Bob Bjornerud for being gracious 
enough to accept the amendment in committee. And everybody 
went with it, and it just made a lot of sense. And so I do find it a 
nice memory to look back when you’ve contributed in some 
small way to making lives a little bit better. 
 
I do have to say, you know, I read through this, and I have to 
talk about, you know, some of the language is often kind of 
intriguing. What are they really trying to say? And here’s a 
definition of an abandoned animal. It makes sense but some of 
the language is, I don’t know whether archaic is the right way to 
say it, but here, I’ll just say it. It’s section 2(1)(a): 
 

“abandoned animal” means an animal that: 
 

(a) is apparently ownerless and not running at large; 
 
So not running about the town, but you can definitely tell that 
it’s ownerless. How do you tell an animal is not ownerless? I 
think there needs to be a little bit more work on expanding that 
language. The animal is apparently ownerless and not running 
at large. Now I don’t know, this is a very quaint description 
because when I see animals running at large, I think that dog 



April 23, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3987 

doesn’t have an owner, or where’s that owner? So I have some 
questions about that. 
 
But anyways there’s a lot of work done here, and I think it’s an 
important piece of legislation that we have before it. And as I 
said, it repeals the animal Act of 1999. And it talks about . . . 
Several pieces of the old Act are maintained, and that’s good. 
That’s good because there’s a lot of good work. And as people 
have developed habits about how they relate to either their 
agricultural animals that they use — the horses, cows, pigs, 
goats, whatever, rabbits — then how do they relate to their 
pets? But it expands the definition of animal in distress, 
including the conditions that would cause the animal extreme 
anxiety or impair the animal’s well-being over time. And I think 
that’s important. 
 
It expands the animal care duties, what is expected of people 
who are responsible for animals — that’s very, very important 
— and changes the language from “humane societies” to 
“animal protection agencies.” Now that will be an interesting 
one to hear more discussion about in committee because we 
know, we know . . . And I have to figure out, I can’t remember 
what the term is when you give animals or objects human 
qualities. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Anthropomorphization. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Yes. And as we all know, and if you’ve ever 
been to somebody’s home, whether they have a cat or a dog, 
how they treat them like a human. So as opposed to a humane 
society, let’s treat a dog like a dog should be treated, and not 
start getting into this kind of odd stuff about putting on other 
things like, you know . . . And I’m guilty of that too. I’m guilty 
of that too. You should hear me and my dog. But I think that’s 
an interesting change of language from “humane society” to 
“animal protection agency.” So when we get into the 
committee, that’ll be an interesting discussion for that. 
 
It includes limits on transporting animals who would suffer 
unduly during that transportation. And you know, I was just 
listening to the news yesterday about transporting horses by 
planes. It is a thing to transport . . . to sell horses to other 
countries for slaughter. And the deal is they can’t be longer than 
30 hours without water, and if they happen to get stuck on a 
tarmac or something, it can be quite an issue. And this was 
happening I think in Vancouver where the plane, it was getting 
to be really close and the plane wasn’t taking off, and it was 
loaded with horses for another country. I think they made it . . . 
they were going to make it out okay, but again all of that is . . . 
These are real challenges that we have, and that’s very, very 
important. It includes a section on humane slaughter and 
euthanasia, which is hugely important. 
 
And this one’s very important: veterinarians have the duty to 
report now when they have reasonable grounds to believe 
someone isn’t caring for an animal or is causing them distress. 
Before, I understand, they didn’t have that responsibility. But 
now when they do see animals coming in and if it’s a clear case 
that there’s some abuse happening, they should report it. I think 
it’s very important to do that. 
 
And it outlines the ways that animal protection officers can 
relieve an animal in distress, i.e. how they get into the premises 

or vehicles, and rules that apply to animal protection agencies 
across the province. So that’s very good. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as you may be aware, Saskatchewan has had 
for several years a quite unflattering record of our animal 
protection laws. And this is something that’s done annually by 
the Animal Legal Defense Fund. There is media that comes out 
almost on an annual basis about where we rank, and 
unfortunately I have to say that the current ranking that we have 
is we are number 11 out of 12. And this is something that we 
haven’t been able to see a change over the course of several 
years. And I was actually surprised because when we did the 
2010 change, particularly embracing the psychological 
harassment aspect, that didn’t seem to bump us very much. 
 
So this is one that, I would think that when our critic for 
Agriculture is in the committee, that she’ll probably be asking a 
lot of questions about that ranking system, how can we 
improve, and how that’s important. I mean, we don’t want to 
improve because we’re tired of being 11th. We want to improve 
because they’re better standards. And I think that’s an 
important, important aspect. 
 
And I can read into the record some of the improvements that 
we should be looking at, some of the things around “better 
definitions, standards of basic care, broader range of 
protections, prohibitions related to animal fighting” — and I 
think that’s one that we can all understand. I mean there’s really 
no place for having or ignoring animal fighting. If that is 
happening, we should make sure that that’s illegal and that there 
is action taken. 
 
“Recognition of psychological harm,” and that was something I 
was talking about with service animals, that we did a lot of 
work around that. But I don’t know if this is applying to all 
domestic animals and what the issue is there. But I think this is 
very important that we take a look. 
 
Increased penalties for routine offenders. Very, very important. 
Mandatory fines. Some of these things are really things that I 
think that we probably should have been looking at in terms of 
this bill right now. 
 
Immunity for anyone who reports animals in distress, assists in 
the enforcement of animal protection legislation. And that 
would be an interesting one because we often see neighbours or 
people who . . . Yes, neighbours would be the word. People 
who live in close proximity see animals that are not being 
treated well. And whether it’s being left in certain conditions 
for a long period of time, left without water, you know, hearing 
of violence or beatings, that type of thing, it’s very important 
that we enable people to report that. 
 
Now it would have to be . . . Certainly this can get into touchy 
territory, but we do think that it’s better to err on the side of 
making sure the animal’s best interests are being looked after as 
opposed to saying, well I’d just rather not say a situation or just 
ignoring the poor animal if they’re being in a tough situation. I 
think it’s better that we take a look and we try to understand 
what’s happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think as we look through this bill there will be 
lots of questions. There is some interesting work. And as I said, 



3988 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2018 

it’s one that we can all get behind, you know, because so many 
of us have that, as I said, a special relationship with an animal 
in some form or shape. And whether it’s a cat or a dog or a 
goldfish or something, it’s that unconditional love that’s so 
important that . . . You know, as humans we can be really 
testing out our human friends, but our animal friends can be 
much more forgiving and move on right away. And so I think 
this is an important bill. 
 
It is interesting, you know, one of my constituents raised the 
issue of shock collars just recently and how appropriate they 
are. And so we’ve doing a little bit of work. I’m finding it very 
interesting just going through the process of discovery in terms 
of, is this an issue? Is this a major issue or is this just . . . Would 
that fall under the case or category of abuse, and really the 
shock collar is just the unfortunate tool of the abuser and it’s 
not that the shock collar that really needs to be banned? But as 
the Animal Defence League says, if you have repeat offenders, 
maybe they should be treated in a more strict and meaningful 
fashion so they don’t re-abuse animals. But at this point we’re 
not finding the same kind of issue around shock collars. But I 
do have to say that our work with the SPCA [Society for the 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals] at the provincial level and 
the local level and others have been pretty quick in terms of 
sharing information. So that’s been very, very good. 
 
So I think this bill is one that is important. It’s hugely 
important. I don’t know if we need to take again as long as we 
did this last time. If we know there are issues to improve it, let’s 
get right at it and make this a great place for animals in 
Saskatchewan. You know, I have to say that animals have 
played a huge part of Saskatchewan’s history before and after 
colonization. I know there is that running gag about, in 
Saskatchewan you can see your dog running away for how 
many days? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Three days. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Three days, three days it is. That didn’t quite 
make it into the legislation because we know that abandoned 
animals are not running about, that they’re just abandoned. 
 
But at any rate, humour aside, this is a very serious, very 
serious topic. And I know our critic will take it very seriously, 
and we appreciate that the Minister of Agriculture has brought 
this forward. It’s always important to be making sure we’re 
right on top of things. And so as his predecessor, Bob 
Bjornerud, did a great job in this piece of work, that we hope he 
continues to do that and be open to any amendments. And we’ll 
have lots of questions when we go into committee on this. 
 
So I think I’m about ready to take my seat. I think I’ve said all 
that I wanted to say. But I did want to just reminisce briefly 
about those service animals, because that was quite a day that 
we had all those dogs in the House. 
 
At any rate, Mr. Speaker, I am going to move adjournment on 
Bill No. 110, An Act respecting the Protection of Animals and 
making consequential amendments to certain Acts. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Centre has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 110, The Animal Protection 
Amendment Act, 2017. Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 111 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doke that Bill No. 111 — The 
Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Good to 
be recognized and take my place today on debate for Bill No. 
111, The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 
2017. 
 
Now when this bill was introduced November 28th, 2017, back 
in the fall, Mr. Speaker, it was introduced against a backdrop of 
a fair number of changes that had taken place in the municipal 
sector, none of which this bill really did much to remedy. But, 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of the piece of legislation itself and 
different of the aspects of the legislation in the history of the 
bill versus actions taken in last year’s budget, wherein, for 
example, grants-in-lieu where contracts were torn up by the 
government and the municipal sector was sandbagged by the 
government in that end, Mr. Speaker . . . I appreciate that the 
government’s going to be looking for things where they can be 
helpful and thoughtful and try to work with the sector, but I 
don’t know if this is quite going to do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I guess as regards the legislation itself, it’s a fine piece of 
housekeeping, modernizing legislation the likes of which this 
government is prone to churn out on an all-too-regular basis. 
But in terms of addressing the broader questions of, does the 
municipal sector have a revenue-sharing formula that they can 
count on, do they have a government that’s going to be a 
good-faith partner in things like grants-in-lieu, and in turn, Mr. 
Speaker, how that is passed along to . . . I know in the city of 
Regina, there’s a fair amount of that activity that has been 
passed on through. And of course it’s the property taxpayer that 
is paying the freight for the way that this government made bad 
choices and then passed the consequences onto the municipal 
sector. And then, of course, where does it wind up but on the 
doorstep of the taxpayer. 
 
And certainly I know that’s something that’s not lost on my 
friends and neighbours in Regina Elphinstone-Centre and 
indeed throughout the city of Regina, where various of the 
property tax increases they’ve been subjected to of late, where 
they might originate. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s the general context. And again I 
don’t know that this one’s going to heal the breach particularly, 
but in as far as you’ve got a particular piece of legislation that 
was first introduced in 1968, the major revision that took place 
in 1978, and then, you know, minor housekeeping from the 



April 23, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3989 

changes that were consequent to changes in The Municipalities 
Act, you know it comes to the time for some spring cleaning, 
housecleaning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly in this case, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got 
modernization efforts such as changing the standard of measure 
in the Act from miles to kilometres. I don’t know if . . . Like, 
you know, okay. Great. That’s fine. Farewell to the imperial 
system. And I’m sure that there’d be some over there that, you 
know, as per the T. rex debate, will take umbrage with that. But 
somehow they’ve managed to strike that blow for modernity 
and finally replace miles with kilometres as the standard form 
of measure in the Act, you know. Big day. Big stuff. 
 
More interestingly, I think, is what is happening with the 
expansion of the membership of the municipal tax sharing 
administration board, where of course these things . . . where 
the rubber hits the road, where the decisions are made and 
operationalized. Expanding the membership of that board from 
three to five, and formalizing representation from SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and the 
potash industry. Again, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know that that’s 
going to quite do it in terms of the efforts on the part of this 
government to make up for what happened with revenue 
sharing and with grants-in-lieu last year. But again always good 
to see the affected parties have representation on the board, Mr. 
Speaker. And again we’ll be looking for how that rolls out and 
actually takes effect. The Act has redefined the “actual 
municipal mill rates,” setting a standard formula to be used for 
all municipalities, stating that “a formula is added to make clear 
how the mill rate is to be calculated for potash tax sharing and 
to avoid improper calculations in the future.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, it of course begs the question, is this referring to a 
specific action or pattern of activity on the part of 
municipalities that are subject to the terms of this legislation? 
I’m sure our critic will follow that up at committee in the more 
closer scrutiny that is provided at that time. 
 
There’s a new section in the Act outlining a standard date to be 
set for when the board announces the mill rate for the year and 
that they inform individual potash mines and potash producers, 
the Potash Producers Association. And again that would seem 
to be a perfectly reasonable, fine change to be made, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of providing that uniform approach across the 
sector and also predictable, reasonable timelines thereto. Again, 
Mr. Speaker, it would seem to be a fine thing. 
 
And then lastly, a section clarifying that tax tools are prohibited 
but that incentives are not, and wherein municipalities can 
continue to apply discounts to tax on potash mine assessments. 
Again, Mr. Speaker, it would be interesting to see how this . . . 
what impact this has on efforts made to put things on a common 
footing, bring about greater uniformity on the one hand, but 
how this affects the range of taxation that’s being applied in the 
name of this particular piece of legislation, and in turn how that 
is shared out amongst the affected municipalities. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that’s a long walk around the block for 
a, you know, nice talk about housekeeping, but with that I know 
that other of my colleagues will have better things to say. I 
think one of my colleagues is trying to bust into the 
conversation right now. But anyway, Mr. Speaker, I know that 

other of my colleagues will have some fine things to say in the 
debate to come on this and certainly we all look forward to that 
great reckoning that comes at committee and the greater inquiry 
as to what really happened in this particular piece of legislation. 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 111, The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment 
Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 111, The Municipal 
Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017. Pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 112 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 112 — The 
Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis 
Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
wade into the debate on Bill No. 112, The Miscellaneous 
Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) 
Amendment Act, 2017. I’ll outline a little bit about the bill, what 
the bill does, and then just flag some concerns — there’s some 
issues that I know people in the community have raised — and 
a little bit about what I learned from my experience on the 
Traffic Safety Committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what this particular bill, No. 112, does, it adds the new 
federal drug offences under the Criminal Code to various 
sections of The Automobile Accident Insurance Act as well as 
The Traffic Safety Act. It adds a definition for drug to this traffic 
safety Act. The bill adds a new section to The Traffic Safety Act 
that outlines a zero tolerance for drugs. It sets out licence 
suspensions, vehicle impoundments, and administrative fines 
for drivers found to have driven while having consumed drugs. 
And drug offences will be dealt with in the same way as 
alcohol-related offences are dealt with except that ignition 
interlocks can’t be used to deal with the consumption of drugs. 
And currently, federally, it’s illegal to drive while impaired 
whether it’s from alcohol or drugs and that remains the same 
with this bill. 
 
Just interesting to note that driving while impaired . . . In 2013 
during the Traffic Safety Advisory Committee, we actually 
learned that impairment often happens from prescription drugs 
and often to older adults, Mr. Speaker, which I didn’t know. 
And I also learned at that point in time too that although young 
people were less likely to consume alcohol and drive than they 
had been in past, that cannabis use was a growing problem for 
young people, Mr. Speaker, and them driving while under the 
influence of cannabis. 
 
I know there are many concerns and there’ll be many questions 



3990 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2018 

asked in committee, but just a few things that jump to mind 
from some conversations. I’ve heard from police services and 
from just talking to police officers that I know that they have 
some concerns around zero tolerance and the enforceability of 
zero tolerance, Mr. Speaker. That is a big concern from law 
enforcement officers. 
 
I know that from my understanding there’s not an accurate or a 
perfect test for cannabis use at the roadside like there is with the 
Breathalyzer, and Breathalyzers actually aren’t always perfect 
either, Mr. Speaker, and have had to meet the test of law and 
can be challenged. But I understand that there’s some concerns 
with the lack of the roadside test. 
 
So to that end, DREs, or drug recognition experts, are going to 
be a huge piece of this puzzle. And I know back in 2013 we 
heard from witnesses that there were, I can’t remember the 
number, but there was a shortage of drug recognition experts 
back at the time of the Traffic Safety Committee. And this was 
prior to the legalization of cannabis and they were very . . . 
Police officers were very concerned that they didn’t have 
enough of these officers on the road to deal with impaired 
driving from different types of drugs, whether it be cannabis or 
prescriptions or anything. 
 
And drug recognition experts are specially trained police 
officers who conduct a series of tests, Mr. Speaker, who . . . that 
from my understanding, drug recognition experts’ testimony . . . 
so they do the tests at roadside and their testimony is acceptable 
in court. So we would need, it is believed, back in 2013, a 
whole lot more drug recognition experts than we had then. I’m 
not sure where we’re at in terms of the lay of the land from that 
time, Mr. Speaker, but I know that once cannabis becomes 
legal, I would argue that we probably, until there is a roadside 
test and even if there is an effective roadside test that meets the 
passability in court, that drug recognition experts will continue 
to be very important, not just for cannabis but for other drugs as 
well. 
 
I know that one of the reasons for legalizing cannabis has been 
to unclog courts with minor possession charges, people who 
end up in court who probably could be dealt with in other ways, 
Mr. Speaker, and just the police flagging these concerns around 
zero tolerance and how things will work through the court 
system. I know people in Justice have, from talking to my 
colleague from Regina Douglas Park who’s the Justice critic . . . 
She’s spoken to a great number of people who are concerned 
that, the way this bill is laid out, they’re flagging some concerns 
about how this will impact our court system and people’s ability 
to move through that court system in an effective way and in a 
way that serves the general public and keeping people safe. 
Because ultimately that’s what this is about, Mr. Speaker, is 
public safety. 
 
I tend to err on the . . . From my experience on the Traffic 
Safety Committee I tend to err on the side of caution more than 
most. Actually it was a really great experience in many ways to 
learn a little bit more about impairment from alcohol and drugs 
and what that does to our body. And I know that I won’t even 
have a beer, Mr. Speaker, or one drink before driving. I tend to 
err on the zero tolerance for myself. But it could become quite 
difficult to enforce from a cannabis perspective. 
 

[16:15] 
 
So there are many questions I know that the public are asking, 
law enforcement is asking, justice officials are asking. I know 
my colleague from Regina Douglas Park, when this bill makes 
it to committee, will have many questions about how this bill 
will roll out and how some of those concerns will be addressed. 
And I know that we all look forward to those answers at that 
point in time. But for now, Mr. Speaker, I think that that 
concludes my comments about Bill No. 112, The Miscellaneous 
Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 112, The Miscellaneous 
Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 113 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doke that Bill No. 113 — The 
Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join 
in on Bill No. 113, The Planning and Development Amendment 
Act, 2017. I just want to make a . . . I guess there’s a number of 
points that are being changed and amended, powers being given 
to the minister, certain powers he’ll retain, certain things he can 
make a decision. Change the order, I guess. Change the 
authority. 
 
But I want to get into one area to start with. Right now there’s 
an amendment to ensure that the conflict of interest provisions 
apply to members of any district development appeals board, 
members of any regional planning authorities. So again conflict 
of interest, we’ve had that back here in the House, and I think 
some people will see right now. I think GTH, there has been 
some questions of people questioning conflicts and, you know, 
we have an ongoing investigation. And we’re waiting for the 
Manitoba government, the prosecution, Manitoba prosecution 
to come back on, you know, a decision on an investigation that 
the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] had undergoing 
and quite . . . [inaudible] . . . And I guess they’ll come back if 
there’s a conflict or not on that one. 
 
So having said that, there’s a process to declare conflict of 
interest. And in this provision, I think it’s making it very clear 
so that nobody’s in a conflict of interest when it comes to 
appeals board, when it comes to the planning. If this is a 
planning for whatever reason — they might be doing a school, a 
P3 — there’s different areas why planning, you know, happens 
in this provision. And it’s just making sure that people disclose, 
if there are any conflicts, that it’s disclosed. I guess it could be a 
family member. It could be a business associate. There could be 



April 23, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3991 

a reason why I guess somebody’s benefiting there. So obviously 
there’s a reason why, and I don’t know. 
 
And I know in committee we’ll have an opportunity to ask the 
minister, okay, why is this being brought in and has there been 
concerns? And maybe it’s a simple thing as a municipality or an 
organization, a group saying, here’s amendments; you can do 
the legislation. That would take away anyone questioning 
ability of someone being appointed. You know, here’s the rules. 
You have to disclose if there is a conflict. And I think 
sometimes that’s fair, so people know that there’s legislation. 
It’s there to protect them and protect Saskatchewan citizens. So 
having said that, that’s an area where we’ll have some questions 
and we can ask that. And I know my colleagues and the critic 
will ask them some questions on that. 
 
Currently there are 10 cities right now that have a granting 
approval status. There’s 10 of them from what I get from the 
legislation. So the minister gives the power to . . . I think 
they’re Saskatoon . . . I don’t have the actual list of them, and 
that’s the other thing that we could find out, but I think they’re 
the bigger centres like Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Regina, Moose 
Jaw. There’s a number of them anyway. There’s 10 of them 
who have certain powers that the minister or legislation gives 
them, the authority when they’re developing a community plan 
or a development plan. From my understanding, Mr. Speaker, 
they develop the plan and they can just go ahead with their plan. 
But following that, they have to submit that plan to the ministry 
or the minister’s attention. And I don’t know if it’s — and that’s 
how we’ll get through this — if it’s for his final approval or his 
ministry gives the final approval. 
 
So having said that, I know . . . And I’ll give you some 
examples of that. For right now we have P3s that the 
government’s been currently using, and they’re using that. And 
there has been I think some interesting questions or concerns 
maybe raised. If I’m correct on, you know, the information that 
I have, there has been some issues and that from time to time I 
think government had to deal with, or Education, whoever . . . 
The planning department, the ministry had to deal with some of 
the challenges from being the city, or the municipality, school 
board. 
 
So when I look at this, the minister does have the powers to 
grant that, but he also can modify the terms of the order which 
he grants them the authority when it comes to . . . [inaudible] 
. . . And if for some reason he’s not pleased, he’s not pleased or 
not happy or for some reason there’s the . . . And this gives 
power to the minister. And I guess that he will say or can say, 
whoever, whether it’s a number of different ministries or 
himself, if it comes out it’s not in the best interests of the 
province, then he can modify it, make some changes. So again 
it gives some powers to the minister. 
 
And from time to time we’ve had people concerned, and I know 
my colleagues have talked about it, where they have been 
concerned about giving over certain powers to the minister 
alone, powers. And you know, you’ll have both sides of an 
argument saying it’s something that’s useful, it’s something that 
isn’t. Something when you take away certain provisions from 
the legislation and you give those powers, you hand them over 
to the minister, duly there are some concerns. 
 

So having said that, an order, you know, and you look at the 
minister may have certain issues. And even if an order is given, 
there’s also the process of, they wanted to make sure I guess 
that it be published in the Gazette. Or there’s a process that they 
have to follow. So when you go through all the different areas, 
that’s one area they want to make sure: if it’s changed, you have 
to publish it in the Gazette. So you know, it goes that. 
 
Now also in here, and there’s quite a bit of them, but some of 
my colleagues I know will go through these areas. Some of 
them, they will see, will have more impact on commercial 
property, as it says, industrial property. It kind of expands it. 
And there’s areas where it’s mixed development and there’s 
going to give provisions, I think again. 
 
And we’ll go in committee where the minister has some final 
say, I guess I’ll say, powers to say whether he’s happy or 
comfortable or the minister feels that they have met all the 
obligations that, I guess as they say in one clause, in the 
province’s interest they’re achieving that. So again it goes back 
to the powers, like I said, of the minister. 
 
But having said that, with the planning . . . So municipal 
planning bylaws are now submitted to the director. So there is a 
director instead of the minister. But saying that the director gets 
it — I guess I’m assuming this — the director finds that he’s 
not happy or she’s not happy anyway in that position, the 
individual’s not happy with the planning, that the minister then 
has certain powers, you know, that the minister, as I talked 
earlier, had these certain powers that they can just I guess 
change the order, amend it, modify it. There’s different 
wording. 
 
And every time you go through this, it gives certain powers 
again to the minister to change things. And I know that might 
be a good thing. It may not be, you know. And again I go back 
to saying I don’t know if the changes and the amendments that 
are being proposed here — and there’s quite a bit of them — 
like when we go through this, I know there’s a lot of work that 
we’ll have to work on in talking with certain individuals, and I 
think there’ll be more. And I’ll get into this later on, a little bit 
about it. 
 
But another, you know, a new section that’s been put into this is 
giving some flexibility. If the minister for some reason is not 
happy with a plan, and for whatever reason, you know, it fails 
to meet, as I said, the province’s . . . school board, for whatever 
reason, the minister can say, I’m going to give you more time. 
Go back to the planning stage. We’re not happy with this, and I 
want this corrected for whatever . . . And I don’t know what 
instance I could use, and I think we’ll find out in committee 
what kind of areas, where we’ll give the minister the 
opportunity to say. And we can ask those questions in 
committee and figure out as we go through this. 
 
What would take the minister to say, I’m going to amend the 
order; I’m going to give more time because I’m not pleased 
with what I see here? And I don’t know if that’s the P3s, if it’s 
where they’re picking the land, if it’s with the school board, if 
it’s municipalities, if there’s other interest in an area where 
they’re picking that this is going to give the minister some 
power to say this needs to move forward. So we’ve got some 
questions in that area, and I know we will have some more 



3992 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2018 

questions. 
 
Another section requires to develop, and again I talk about the 
school plan. And they’re going to have to collaboratively work 
with the Minister of Education and the local school board, as I 
said, and it’s going to take an opportunity to say that they’re 
working together at communicating. Well we sometimes see 
that government doesn’t do their duty to consult and 
accommodate and make sure the message gets through to all the 
partners. And they talk about partnerships, but sometimes 
we’ve seen where the government has failed. 
 
And here they’re bringing in, to me it looks like a new section 
that will require municipalities to do certain things to make sure 
they’re partnering and working with, when they’re developing 
their plan, and I guess that’s schools and whatever they’re 
doing, a residential area. And again I’m going from my 
understanding, and I’m not going to say that I have a good 
understanding of it all, but I do know you see the changes 
coming in. You see powers being added to the minister versus 
the way it was before, so you’re giving certain powers and that. 
 
But I guess overall, once you look at the whole bill itself, there 
are many changes throughout this bill that will impact many, 
whether it’s municipalities, school divisions. The plan to 
develop . . . And when we do that . . . And I know cities have 
done that. I think, you know, I remember I think I went to one 
time where there was a community plan being brought up, and I 
think it was by the city. And their planning development 
department had come up with a plan and I believe the public 
was invited. And you know, you could go and listen to exactly 
what the plan was. 
 
And they would come up with a plan, and they would move 
forward to make sure that the residents and those individuals 
that say that they have an invested interest in the area that 
they’re developing would be consulted. And that’s a side where 
you see that. And sometimes there are regional issues and 
sometimes there’s not regional issues. And sometimes there 
may be . . . And it gives a provision in there to make sure that 
that process happens. 
 
Now as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, I know that, you know, 
we’ll have more questions in committee. And we’ll have a 
chance to question the minister and ask, who exactly did they 
consult? Who gave input into this? And who, you know, 
requested some of the changes, the amendments you’re making 
and some of the new sections that you’re putting into 
legislation? And we’ll get a good grasp of, to why. And 
sometimes we don’t know, and there might be a good reason 
why. Maybe Saskatchewan residents have asked for it. Maybe 
cities, municipalities, school boards . . . There might be many 
different, you know, issues that have been raised to government 
to say, this is why you’re bringing in the legislation, and that 
might be. It might be some of the concerns that have been 
raised by members on this side of the House or members on that 
side of the House. 
 
But the point is they’re developing some legislation. There’s 
quite a bit in here that will make many . . . And they’re going to 
impact. I mean, there’s many changes. And I think at the end of 
the day, for myself and my colleagues, we may have some more 
questions. And I think we’ll, you know, get a chance to talk to 

some of the municipalities I think that will be impacted to see, 
are they good with this? And you know, as my colleague, the 
critic, she will do her job to meet with municipalities and find 
out some of those, the challenges and why some of this 
legislation . . . 
 
So at this point I don’t have any further comments on this bill, 
Mr. Speaker. And I’m prepared to adjourn debate on Bill 113. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 113, The Planning and 
Development Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[16:30] 
 

Bill No. 114 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 114 — The 
Vehicles for Hire Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Always good to be recognized and take my place, join debate, 
in this case on Bill No. 114, The Vehicles for Hire Act summary 
. . . pardon me, The Vehicles for Hire Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now having just been referring to my iPhone just before I came 
here or took to my feet, Mr. Speaker, I get that it’s an 
interesting time, that ride-sharing applications . . . I see my 
friend over there is just trying to do something on an app right 
now. We had a visit in the House just the other day, Mr. 
Speaker, by some lovely people from Lyft. I think they were 
here with a nice person from Hill+Knowlton. Or was it 
Crestview? It was Crestview. So I get that there’s a lot of work 
going on out there in lobby country. 
 
I get that the technology is kicking up different and new 
possibilities out there in the world of ride sharing. And indeed, 
Mr. Speaker, I think I heard a story on the radio the other day 
about a bike-sharing application, where it takes the concept of 
bike sharing, meshes it with GPS [global positioning system], 
and allows for bicycles to be going from point to point and then, 
you know, picking up a bicycle where it’s most convenient and 
then on down the line. 
 
And certainly in this day and age, Mr. Speaker, where 
everybody’s looking for a side hustle it would seem — and not 
just members of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker — but certainly 
where people are looking for new and different ways to stitch 
together what it takes to pay the bills on a given month, the 
appeal from the drivers’ side for something like Uber or Lyft is 
plain, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I guess, you know, there are a number of reasons that have 
us here contemplating this particular piece of legislation that, on 



April 23, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3993 

the face of it, certainly I don’t have a problem with just so long 
as we’ve got some confidence, some assurance on a number of 
points, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I guess that when you’ve got a situation in the province, 
certainly in our larger centres, where the safety of workers in 
the taxi-driving industry is a matter for concern as it stands, Mr. 
Speaker, you would think that that . . . And again, this isn’t 
something that isn’t new. This is something that’s shouldn’t 
come as a surprise. 
 
It does come as a bit of a shock, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 
severity of some of the incidences that have taken place and the 
grievous injury inflicted upon cab drivers, Mr. Speaker, and the 
way that they are looking for some action, some assurance from 
their government as regards better means to protect their very 
lives, Mr. Speaker. And indeed when someone is injured on the 
job and unable to continue to perform that duty and earn that 
paycheque, what steps we’re taking as a society to make sure 
that that income security is there, that insurance is there, Mr. 
Speaker. So certainly that this is a circumstance that cries out 
for action, cries out for remedy from this government as is, Mr. 
Speaker, and we had yet another poignant and terrible reminder 
of that very fact here today in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. That 
is representative of a set of issues that needs action on the part 
of this government as well.  
 
And again that this government comes forward with 
vehicle-for-hire legislation enabling ride-sharing applications 
and puts that forward as a big offensive in the war against drunk 
driving in this province, Mr. Speaker. And again where we do 
have a tremendous problem in the province of Saskatchewan, in 
terms of what’s in some ways a way that we lead the nation, in 
terms of incidents of drunk driving, in terms of the horrible 
carnage that results all too often from that, Mr. Speaker, you 
know, that this is seized upon by the government as a major 
initiative in the fight against drunk driving. Fair enough. I don’t 
know that the statistics or the analysis quite bears that out. But 
in terms of providing different options for people to take a safe 
ride home, you know, I guess it certainly bears consideration. 
And we’re not dismissing it out of hand, Mr. Speaker.  
 
But it would seem to me that there are certainly other pressing 
issues that are to be considered in this sector, Mr. Speaker, that 
cry out for address and have for years, Mr. Speaker. So again 
it’s a choice that governments have, to listen to the voices that 
are crying out for change. And in terms of the situation that was 
raised yet again here today following on the heels of other 
circumstances, of other incidences that have taken place over 
years on this government’s watch, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in a context where, you know, I think from organizations 
representing the cab drivers themselves saying that they have no 
problem with a level playing field, Mr. Speaker. So that you 
have those assurances around training, around the quality, 
around the safety of not just the drivers but of the passengers as 
well. And that, you know, that’s what the level playing field 
looks like. If those things can be assured, Mr. Speaker, then 
why wouldn’t you proceed with something like this? 
 
But again it’s part of a broader context where, in the current 
regime, this government has some difficulty providing for that 
safety, providing for that quality assurance as it is, Mr. Speaker. 

Let alone with how the workers are left in extreme difficulty, 
Mr. Speaker, when having sustained what in some cases would 
be life . . . It’s amazing that they didn’t get killed, Mr. Speaker. 
But they can survive that and then are left to try and navigate 
how you put together income for a household. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, you know, if a government is listening, 
you’d find them acting on those very concerns, Mr. Speaker. So 
again there’s a broader context that comes with a piece of 
legislation like this, Mr. Speaker. There are a broader set of 
concerns that cry out for redress in that context, Mr. Speaker. 
And again, the government needs more than selective picking 
and choosing when it comes to what will improve the 
circumstance for people needing opportunities or options for a 
safe ride home. But also, Mr. Speaker, we owe something to 
those men and women that are providing that safe ride home. 
Surely to goodness that’s something that we can see through to 
acting upon as a society. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that other of my colleagues that have 
been tasked with this particular set of responsibilities have been 
following the issues very closely and I am sure will have some 
very thoughtful and well-informed things to say on these 
matters, but in aid of getting ever closer to those interventions 
and then of course to the kind of discussion we will have at 
committee, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 114, The Vehicles for Hire Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 114, The Vehicles for 
Hire Act. Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 115 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 115 — The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To join in on Bill 
115, The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act. Initially I 
guess there’s a number of points, you know, and the main 
points that are being changed in here. 
 
One of the areas is giving provision in light of the governments, 
and I guess the federal government coming out with the 
cannabis legislation that the province is being asked to 
introduce. This is going to give, I guess, landlords the ability in 
this legislation, in Bill 115, it’s going to give the landlord some 
ability to . . . and this is what the proposed legislation is 
bringing in. The use of anyone to use cannabis, to sell cannabis, 
to grow cannabis, to have possession of cannabis in, I guess, a 
rental unit; plants and stuff like that. 
 
And this is what is being proposed: legislation that will give the 
power to the landlord — new powers that they never had 
before, which, you know . . . And I want to be clear. My 



3994 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2018 

understanding, it prohibits the possession, the use, selling, 
distribution of cannabis, or the growing of and possession of 
cannabis plants. So it’s really making it very clear, I think. 
 
Now I don’t know in this legislation . . . And I know we’re 
going to have more questions. I know there are individuals who 
are, through I guess a doctor, medical, you know, cannabis, and 
there’s a different process that people are using as a medication. 
And my understanding, I’m not really . . . I don’t have all the 
details, and I know maybe my colleague from Health, the critic, 
will have that or others will have that, or we will get 
clarification from the minister and the minister’s officials about 
the overall. 
 
Is there going to be an exemption and will there be an 
exemption if somebody has a prescription by a doctor and, you 
know, has the whatever . . . the process has to say yes, I’m 
using this for, you know, for medical purposes and I’m using 
this. I don’t know if there is, and there might be a provision 
under Health or maybe even in the Rentalsman or, you know, 
part of that that gives powers. 
 
But at this point I just want to kind of make it, I guess, going 
through it and just saying how the rules are, and it’s changing 
and making new powers for the landlord. But again you want a 
balance there too, and if somebody’s I guess using miracle 
marijuana and it’s been prescribed by a doctor, that that’s a 
challenge that may come up, and maybe there is something 
that’s already been dealt with. 
 
Now that’s one area that we were talking about and I see in 
here. The other area that they’re going into, it gives the Office 
of Residential Tenancies, ORT as they abbreviate, they’ve got 
certain powers now that they can use. And it’s giving them, I 
guess, new powers to not hear an application. And I’m not sure 
exactly if there’s been an order already. And this is what I’m 
trying to understand from this, if the, you know, ORT has 
already given an order that somebody can’t come in and want to 
. . . I think it’s giving powers to the ORT to say no, I’m not 
going to hear, accept your application. We’ve already given an 
order; you need to comply with it. And that’s my 
understanding. 
 
And I don’t know if there was, where even though they had 
given an order before and maybe they, you know, it’s gone 
ahead to evict somebody, that now you can go to the 
Rentalsman and ask, you know, there was a . . . You still got to 
go ahead and have an appeal or something. So I’m not sure, and 
I guess we’ll work out those details, you know, and find out 
exactly what they’re meaning in here. Are they giving them the 
ability to say no, we’ve issued the order and now we’re not 
going to, you know, we’re not going to change that. 
 
[16:45] 
 
So the other thing is tenants that during that appeal process . . . 
And from my understanding, what I’m getting from this, if a 
tenant, and if it was automatic — and I don’t know if this was 
— but if somebody appealed their eviction notice and they go 
through that process, I’m not sure if it’s time that, how long it 
takes to go through and have a hearing. And to have your 
appeal, you’re appealing your eviction notice or whatever it is 
you’re saying the landlord has done. You’re appealing it 

because there’s been an order given, but you’re appealing it. 
 
And this is where I’m getting . . . It’d be my understanding of it 
and, we’ll get that worked out, that maybe some people didn’t 
pay their rent. While that appeal was being heard, for whatever 
reason they didn’t pay the rent. What this provision now gives 
in there is, it says and it makes it very clear that they must 
continue to pay their monthly rent to the landlord. So I’m 
assuming that that hadn’t happened and this is why they’re 
bringing this decision in. It gives the . . . to collect arrears and 
so that they don’t get into arrears, but that . . . [inaudible] . . . 
appeal. So having said that, but again you always want to find a 
balance with everything, you know, and it is with rentals try to 
work. 
 
And I think, you know, there are many good landlords out there 
provide a great service and they provide a home for many 
Saskatchewan residents. There are many of them. Are there 
challenges? I think, yes. I don’t know, you know, some seem to 
handle it well and they’re great renters. And some people are 
great landlords and they have a, some people rent for years. I 
know people have rented from the same landlord for 20 years, 
25 years, and everything’s gone good and that’s good. 
 
We also have I guess when you think about it, we have some of 
the challenges I know back home, whether it’s a housing 
authority or a private. You have a government, you know, Sask 
Housing or the regional housing authority that rent out units. 
Obviously this will apply to them as well when they’re having 
certain situations. So there must be a reason why, you know, 
legislation’s being brought in. Whether they’re new or 
amendments being brought to it, there must be reasons. 
 
The other area where I noticed, Mr. Speaker, they’ve brought in 
. . . The provision before is, my understanding is, if there was 
the landlord and the tenant decided well, you know what, the 
landlord said I want you out, had the power to evict somebody, 
I guess, or end the tenancy agreement that they had with the 
resident, that person moving out. Now when that person moves 
out, do they take all their stuff? Or if it was abandoned . . . You 
could use that too, where let’s say somebody abandons the 
place they’re renting and they just don’t collect their 
belongings. My understanding, the landlord then had to take 
their possessions and try to make sure that the tenant was . . . 
got their stuff, the information that they needed. 
 
So the order, the order now, when you look at this, would say 
that you can get rid of someone’s . . . If it’s under, I believe it’s 
$1,500 is what they’re saying. If it’s under $1,500 the landlord 
doesn’t have to, you know, making sure the property that’s 
there, that the landlord doesn’t . . . with an order can actually go 
ahead and move on and not have those belongings. 
 
Now when I say that a balance . . . If it’s under $1,500 and it’s 
furniture maybe there’s certain things that are left. But I guess if 
there’s personal items in the home, maybe it’s pictures, certain 
documents that are in a, you know, a house, I’m not sure if that 
gives . . . And I know we’ll ask these questions in committee to 
find out. Does that give the landlord the ability to say, well it 
didn’t matter what was in there. Whether it was pictures, 
whether there was documents, whatever, they can discard them. 
They don’t have to put them in safekeeping in a compound, or 
in a storage and pay for the storage. 



April 23, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3995 

And I know we’ll have more questions about that, if that’s what 
that means, and again we talk about this. There needs to be 
balance and you’re going to try to find the balance with 
landlord and rentals, and people have rights when you’re 
renting a unit and they feel they should have. It’s their home. 
They should have . . . [inaudible] . . . So you’re trying to I guess 
work through landlords and I guess that’s what the ORT, you 
know, office does and tries to, you know, accommodate and 
tries to mediate situations like this. 
 
But I’ve just gone through a few of the points that this 
legislation will be bringing in, and changes and allows. So 
having said that, I know we’re going to have more questions 
and we will have, you know, more questions . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — One or two. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Oh, one or two, as my colleague says. But 
we’ll get into committee and we can ask for some . . . who did 
they consult with? Was this brought on by, you know, the 
ORT? Or was it brought on landlords? Was it brought on by 
residents? Obviously this is here for a reason and we’ll . . . In 
committee we can ask the government more details to their 
officials as to why we’re bringing the legislation, and is this the 
right amount. 
 
It’s a balance like everything. Who did you consult with? Is this 
going to fix it? Or if there’s suggestions we can bring in that, 
you know, our colleagues and critics have that could say, here’s 
some legislation you can add. 
 
And sometimes we talk about working on that co-operation. We 
work together. Maybe there’s ideas that we can bring in that 
would, you know, address some of the challenges that we’re 
hearing out there and make the process work well for residents 
and landlords. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I have no further comments on 
Bill No. 115, The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, and 
I’m prepared to adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Cumberland has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 115, The Residential Tenancies 
Amendment Act, 2017. Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 103 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 103 — The Land 
Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I enter into discussion as it 
relates to Bill No. 103, The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017. 
I recognize that the changes that are brought forward in this 
legislation, the minister suggests have been motivated by the 
important work of the Law Reform Commission of 

Saskatchewan. And that certainly, you know, adds some 
strength to the argument that change is needed. Certainly as you 
look through the changes that are brought forward, they look to 
be rather housekeeping in nature, common sense, and — I hope 
— oriented to ensure better protection for consumers across our 
province. 
 
Certainly as we engage in this process, we’ll reach out across 
the province and listen to stakeholders, make sure that these 
measures in fact reflect the realities of consumers, of families 
across our province as they deal with mortgages that are going 
through a process of foreclosure. 
 
So this bill brings forward changes to processes for foreclosure 
proceedings. It defines what that process looks like. My 
understanding is that its intention is to make plain the 
communication process between the parties at that point in time 
and states what the process would look like before the 
foreclosure. And certainly that’s important. 
 
I know the minister has stated that this would bring about a 
simplification to the process. Again, you know, that’s 
important. But ultimately what we want to make sure is that the 
bill is fair and that in fact consumers are being better protected 
on this front. I’ve read that the minister suggests that this will 
increase the time period between the notice and the hearing. 
The hearing will remain the same, but it’s increased the . . . 
between the notice and the hearing. And as well this would 
repeal two different bills. 
 
So it’s important that the changes that have been brought 
forward, that they reflect the realities that families and people 
across Saskatchewan are facing. It’s important as well that any 
unintended consequences of this legislation have been 
contemplated and considered. 
 
And it’s on that front, Mr. Speaker, that we don’t have a whole 
lot of faith in the current Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, 
who far too often on bill after bill, legislation after legislation, 
cut after cut, change after change, sell-off after sell-off, simply 
aren’t looking to the future, aren’t consulting with 
Saskatchewan people — whether that be municipalities or 
people or families, educators, Mr. Speaker, small businesses 
across the province — as they bring forward their changes. So 
we’ll be seeking a better understanding of what consultation has 
looked like on this piece of legislation. 
 
It’s also worthy to note this is a discussion of, or a legislation, 
legislation pertaining to foreclosure around mortgages. It is 
concerning, Mr. Speaker, to members on this side of the 
Assembly that the Sask Party has created economic conditions, 
Mr. Speaker, and far too often worsened economic conditions 
for Saskatchewan families. And it’s concerning to us that the 
reality right now is that, I believe, we’re leading the nation with 
the increase to the number of mortgages that are in arrears over 
a period of three months, that we see significant spikes to 
bankruptcy within our province right now. Now these are the 
hard realities that households are facing all across the province, 
that families are facing all across the province, and they’re 
reflective of an economy that’s not working in the way that it 
should for the people of Saskatchewan. And we’ve been a voice 
on this front. 
 



3996 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2018 

In many ways, when you look at foreclosures and mortgages 
being in arrears and bankruptcy, it’s a bit of a canary in a coal 
mine as to what’s going on within your economy. And I think 
it’s important for this government to get that the choices that 
they’ve been making from an economic perspective just aren’t 
hitting the mark for Saskatchewan families. 
 
Far too many families are dealing with underemployment, Mr. 
Speaker. Far too many others are facing unemployment and job 
loss all across our province. I know so many people that I 
represent, Mr. Speaker, are dealing with precarious work. So 
many others piecing together their ability to pay the bills by 
working two and three jobs, Mr. Speaker, with a serious toll on 
them and their families, Mr. Speaker. And there’s an important 
role for government to build an economy that, you know, 
doesn’t just work for the select few, Mr. Speaker, but that 
works for all. 
 
And so right now we need to be working and advancing job 
creation across our province. We have limitless . . . or such 
tremendous opportunity when we look to things like renewable 
power generation and the kind of jobs we could be creating, the 
investment we could be driving all across our province. The 
same can be said for energy efficiency retrofits across our 
province, working in partnership with our Crowns, Mr. 
Speaker. We should be driving investment and job creation 
while also building infrastructure and making improvements 
that will reduce emissions. 
 
Importantly, we need to be acting to certainly ensure pipeline 
capacity and ensure access to tidewater for our resources. And 
we need to be acting, Mr. Speaker, to make our rail system 
actually perform. Far too often we have those that are shipping 
our product, their product, Mr. Speaker, producers with 
incredible crops in the bins but not getting to market, 
manufacturers that are struggling to get product to market or 
refineries struggling to get product to market or potash 
producers struggling to get product to market, because we have 
an underperforming rail system in this province. 
 
This is a time for us to be supporting the diversification of our 
economy certainly through value-add ag, through the tech 
sector, but also building back a film industry, Mr. Speaker — 
that was scrapped and eliminated by this government — filling 
up that sound stage once again, creating the jobs and driving 
investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see the time on the clock here, Mr. Speaker. So 
there’s much more I can say about how we need to work to 
strengthen our economy. The point is the Sask Party are failing 
the people of this province, certainly as it relates to this bill. We 
need to ensure fairness and consumer protection that works for 
the people of our province. And at this point in time I adjourn 
debate for Bill No. 103, The Land Contracts (Actions) Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 103, The Land Contracts 
(Actions) Act, 2017. Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Recognize the Government House 

Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
House do now adjourn so we can do committee work this 
evening. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3965 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3965 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3965 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3965 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3965 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3965 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3966 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3966 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3966 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Recognizing Sunchild Law’s Contributions to the Community 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3966 
 Atamiskākēwak National Gathering in Moose Jaw 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3967 
 Point-in-Time Counts Help Build a Plan to End Homelessness 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3967 
 Saskatoon Police Service Exemplary Service Awards 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3967 
 Skills Canada Provincial Competition Held in Regina 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3968 
 Archaeology Professor Works to Preserve Saskatchewan Heritage 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3968 
 Pharmacist Awareness Month Recognizes Skilled Health Care Providers 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3968 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Members of the Legislative Assembly Seeking Federal Office 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3968 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3969 
 Former Member and Irrigation Project Approval Process 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3969 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3969 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3970 
 Treatment of Saskatchewan Immigrant Nominee Program Clients 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3970 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3970 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3971 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3972 
 Coverage for Taxi Drivers Injured at Work 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3972 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3972 
 Cannabis Distribution Model 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3973 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3973 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 126 — The Energy Export Act 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3973 
 Bill No. 127 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3973 
 Bill No. 128 — The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2018 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3974 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Unparliamentary Language 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3974 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3974 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 123 — The Snowmobile (Fees) Amendment Act, 2018 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3974 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3975 



 

 Bill No. 124 — The Environmental Management and Protection  
 (Environmental Handling Charges) Amendment Act, 2018 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3975 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3976 
 Bill No. 125 — The Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3977 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3978 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 104 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017 
 Code des droits de la personne de la Saskatchewan de 2017 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3979 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 3980 
 Bill No. 105 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3980 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 3982 
 Bill No. 121 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3982 
 Bill No. 122 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2018 
 Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act  
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3985 
 Bill No. 107 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2017 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3985 
 Bill No. 110 — The Animal Protection Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3986 
 Bill No. 111 — The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3988 
 Bill No. 112 — The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017  
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3989 
 Bill No. 113 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3990 
 Bill No. 114 — The Vehicles for Hire Act  
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3992 
 Bill No. 115 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3993 
 Bill No. 103 — The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3995 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 




