


















































May 24, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 64A  THURSDAY, MAY 24, 2018, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4365 
 May 24, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it gives me great pleasure to welcome to this Assembly 54 
grade 4 and 5 students from École St. Angela Merici school. 
Give everyone a wave, you guys. 
 
They’re accompanied by their teachers, Tara Fischer and Tyra 
Padget. And we have quite a few parent chaperones, so just to 
make sure that everyone’s kept in line, I guess. We’ve got Gary 
Bahr, Eden Daley, Kelly Lato, Cristal Wirth, Ned Donaldson, 
Jillian Kurty, Jenelle Heroux, Anjali Bansal, Marina 
Aleshechkina. I hope I said that correctly. So we have an 
opportunity to meet with the students later on, and so we 
welcome them to the Legislative Assembly today. So thank you 
very much for coming to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
join with the member for Rochdale in welcoming the school 
group in the west gallery, but particularly their teacher, Ms. 
Tyra Padget. Ms. Padget, maybe a few would know, was 
actually a summer student in my office for a number of years as 
she was getting her degree, a very integral part of our team 
there, and I would count as a good friend. She became a very 
good friend over those years, Mr. Speaker. We miss her dearly 
in the office, but I know she’s serving the children very well as 
their teacher. 
 
So I ask all members to join with me in welcoming the school 
group, but also Ms. Tyra Padget to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
the west gallery, it’s my privilege to introduce a group of grade 
8 and 9 students from the Elrose Composite School, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they’re accompanied by their teachers, 
Jeff Kingwell and Jill Drews; and also parent chaperones 
Chastity Varty, Kerri Calwell, and Travis Josdal, who’s joining 
us on the Assembly floor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These students, I had an opportunity to meet with them in my 
office earlier this morning, Mr. Speaker. I just want to point out 
these students were on the road this morning at 5:30 in the 
morning, so they’ve had a very long day already. They’ve got a 
great day ahead of them. I’m just thrilled that they’re here. 
Thanks so much to Jill and Jeff for arranging that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to please welcome them 
to their Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present petitions on behalf of very concerned citizens as it 
relates to the harmful cuts, the callous cuts, the cuts that defy 
common sense to people living with disabilities and to families 
living on the tightest of budgets with children, Mr. Speaker, and 
of course that’s the Sask Party government’s cut to the rental 
housing supplement. 
 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to immediately restore the 
Saskatchewan rental housing supplement. 

 
And these petitions today are signed by concerned citizens of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed 
to the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on 
the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we know the NDP 
[New Democratic Party] opposition wants to cripple 
Saskatchewan with the carbon tax. They claim they want to 
help the poor. A carbon tax will not only increase your utility 
bills, but it will also increase your food prices. It’ll make our 
farmers uncompetitive on the world market. It’ll make our 
potash uncompetitive on the world market. Our oil rigs will 
move to the United States where there is no carbon tax. 
 
If that were to happen, where would the NDP opposition get the 
2.5 billion a year for their leader’s promises? Mr. Speaker, the 
Leader of the Opposition is literally living in la-la land. At least 
the Saskatchewan Party and our Premier will stand up to Justin 
Trudeau and say no to a carbon tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Carrot 
River, Prince Albert, Saskatoon, and Nipawin. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. And 
the undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan want 
to bring to our attention the following: that Saskatchewan’s 
outdated election Act allows corporations, unions, and 



4366 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2018 

individuals, even those living outside of Saskatchewan, to make 
unlimited donations to our province’s political party. 
 
And we know that, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve to live in a fair province where all voices 
are equal and money can’t influence politics. But we know, Mr. 
Speaker, Brad Wall, the former Sask Party leader, was the only 
premier in the country who collected a special cash bonus paid 
for by taxpayer-funded subsidies and portions of the millions in 
donations they collected from corporations and big money 
donors, including those from outside of this province.  
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that over the past 10 years, the Sask 
Party’s collected $12.61 million in corporate donations and, of 
that, $2.7 million came from companies outside of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan politics should 
belong to Saskatchewan people, and we know that the federal 
government and the provinces of Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, 
Nova Scotia, and British Columbia have moved to limit this 
influence and level the playing field by banning corporate and 
union donations to political parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan campaign finance laws to 
end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 
from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 
on individual donations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today come from 
Paddockwood, Kinistino, Marcelin, Grand Coulee, Lumsden, 
and Regina Beach. I do so present. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical workplace supports for 
survivors of domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has 
the very dubious distinction of having the highest rates of 
intimate partner violence amongst all the provinces in Canada. 
And we know that as legislators we must do so much more to 
protect survivors of domestic violence. 
 
For many who experience this violence, the violence will 
follow them to their workplace, which is why the signatories to 
this petition are calling for five days of paid leave and up to 17 
weeks of unpaid leave be made available to workers who are 
survivors of domestic violence, and that critical workplace 
supports made available to survivors of domestic violence be 
also made available to workers living with post-traumatic stress 
disorder as a result of domestic violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what those who are on the front line of this 
crisis are calling for: the YWCA [Young Women’s Christian 
Association] of Regina; PATHS [Provincial Association of 
Transition Houses and Services of Saskatchewan] as well, as 
two examples of organizations who are calling for this. They 
recognize the importance of ensuring that those who are fleeing 
domestic violence are able to maintain their employment while 

they’re transitioning to a safer living environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what we’re calling for in our private 
member’s bill, Bill No. 609. It’s the fourth time — the fourth 
time, Mr. Speaker — that we’ve tabled these provisions in the 
last two years. It’s time for the government to step up to the 
plate, do the right thing, and pass these provisions for these 
survivors. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to pass legislation to ensure 
critical supports in the workplace, including reasonable 
accommodation, paid and unpaid leave for survivors of 
domestic violence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today come 
from Regina. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

2018 Cathedral Village Arts Festival 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the Cathedral Village Arts Festival 
is a creative celebration of community through the arts that I am 
so proud to have in my constituency. From May 21st to May 
27th, Cathedral area residents invite their neighbours to 
celebrate the gifts that arts and culture bring to our community. 
 
This year 97 events in 13 venues will take place, featuring over 
120 artists and performers. The festival features visual arts, 
writing and poetry, crafts, and many impressive performances. 
The street fair provides a venue for over 300 artisans and 
vendors to sell their wares. The festival encourages children and 
youth and adults to create, participate, and enjoy the arts in all 
forms. 
 
The theme of this year’s 27th annual festival is Expect the 
Unexpected. From humble but spirited roots back in 1991, the 
festival has grown immensely and now attracts upwards of 
40,000 audience members, making it one of the largest festivals 
in the province. The CVAF [Cathedral Village Arts Festival] 
operates as a committee of the Cathedral Area Community 
Association and is made possible by the efforts of over 150 
volunteers from across the artistic, professional, and business 
spectrum. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking the CVAF team for 
their hard work in making this year’s festival a success, and I 
invite everyone to come out to the festival this week. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Saskatoon Plaque Honours Afghanistan Veterans 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
city of Saskatoon has permanently commemorated those who 
fought in the Afghanistan war. A plaque was added to the 



May 24, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4367 

Saskatoon cenotaph marking the North Saskatchewan 
Regiment’s efforts in the 13-year war in Afghanistan. I was 
proud to join with my Royal Canadian Legion comrades as a 
military ceremony was held to mark this occasion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Afghanistan war was the longest combat 
mission in Canadian history. One hundred and fifty-eight 
Canadian soldiers were killed during this conflict, including 10 
members from Saskatchewan and two from Saskatoon. Master 
Corporal Joshua Roberts and Corporal Shane Keating paid the 
ultimate sacrifice for our freedoms. Their Silver Cross Mothers 
joined us in the commemoration. 
 
Our soldiers honour their country, fighting in Afghanistan to 
protect the rights we have here in Canada and Saskatchewan. 
We are proud to remember our soldiers and honour their 
memory by having this plaque dedicated to those who made the 
ultimate sacrifice. It will serve as a place to recognize their 
service and pay our respects. Mr. Speaker, this plaque will be 
an addition to the three commemorative plaques already 
existing in the Saskatoon cenotaph, including one for each of 
the two world wars as well as the Korean war. 
 
I ask all members to join me in honouring the 10 Saskatchewan 
soldiers who lost their lives fighting this war. We will 
remember them. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Congress of the Humanities and Social Sciences at the 
University of Regina 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize 
Congress 2018 which takes place this Saturday, May 26th to 
June 1st. Congress 2018 is being hosted by the University of 
Regina. The theme is Gathering Diversities. 
 
Typically spanning seven days in late May and early June and 
attracting over 8,000 attendees, Congress is organized by the 
Federation for the Humanities and Social Sciences and is hosted 
by a different Canadian university each year. The Federation, 
the host university, scholarly associations, and partners develop 
a full week of presentations, workshops, panels, public lectures, 
cultural events, and receptions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the annual Congress of the Humanities and Social 
Sciences is a convergence of over 70 scholarly associations, 
each holding their annual conference under one umbrella. Now 
in its 87th year, this flagship event is much more than Canada’s 
largest gathering of scholars. Congress brings together 
academics, researchers, policy-makers, and practitioners to 
share findings, refine ideas, and build partnerships that will help 
shape the Canada of tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federation promotes research and teaching for 
the advancement of an inclusive, democratic, and prosperous 
society. I ask all members to join with me in thanking all the 
organizers, the host committee, and in celebrating this 
incredible academic gathering and, of course, in welcoming all 
attendees to Regina. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:15] 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar-Sask 
Valley. 
 

Saskatchewan Team Wins World Senior 
Curling Championship 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this month, 
Anita Silvernagle became a world champion, representing 
Canada at the world senior curling tournament in Östersund, 
Sweden. Silvernagle became a champion alongside her team, 
Patty Hersikorn, Brenda Goertzen, and Sherry Anderson. Mr. 
Speaker, Anita is from Biggar and our community is very proud 
of her for representing Canada on the world stage. 
 
They dominated every team throughout the championship and 
committed to taking this winning attitude and strong game play 
all the way to the final. In the qualifier, Canada defeated 
Finland 10-6, moving on to the semifinal. Mr. Speaker, Anita’s 
team was once again successful, defeating Switzerland in an 
exciting 7-5 win to earn themselves a spot in the championship 
game. The Canadian team then went on to beat the United 
States 5-4, earning themselves the title of world champions. 
 
Anita’s one of the many curling champs to come out of Biggar 
and, along with her community, I’m proud and excited to see 
her add to our rich heritage of athletes, both in our town and our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now ask that all members please join me in 
congratulating Anita Silvernagle, Brenda Goertzen, Patty 
Hersikorn, and Sherry Anderson on a successful win at the 2018 
World Curling Championships. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Rotary Clubs of Saskatoon Dedicated to 
Service Above Self 

 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise in 
this Assembly today and recognize an organization that goes 
above and beyond for the people of Saskatoon. The four Rotary 
Clubs of Saskatoon — Meewasin, North, Nutana, and Riverside 
— continue to do inspiring work for their community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for over 100 years the Rotary Club has been 
committed to service above self, which strengthens 
communities and changes lives. I had the pleasure of bringing 
greetings at the Rotary Club’s 100th anniversary celebration 
last summer, and I was reminded of the great work that the club 
has done — most notably, the restorative action plan and their 
work to eradicate polio. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the restorative action plan was established in 2002 
with the purpose of supporting and working with youth who 
needed help in addressing issues such as conflict, bullying, and 
crime. The program has helped countless young people. 
 
The polio eradication program, though much older as it was 
established 40 years ago, has done significant work helping to 
nearly eradicate the disease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the variety of these two programs from the length 



4368 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2018 

of time pursued to the nature of each, demonstrates the Rotary 
Club’s commitment to the community of Saskatoon. On behalf 
of this entire Assembly, I’d like to thank the Rotary Club and 
all Rotarians for the time and energy they devote and commend 
them on a century of success. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rochdale. 
 

Saskatchewan Umpire Becomes Major League Official 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we know that Saskatchewan is home to many sports enthusiasts, 
great athletes, and officials. I want to recognize and 
congratulate one of Regina’s own, Stu Scheurwater, who has 
begun his first season as a first-time Major League umpire. 
 
Stu Scheurwater is one of only three Canadians to ever land a 
full-time job in the major leagues, and the only individual from 
Saskatchewan to do so. Since 2014 Scheurwater has been called 
up for the major leagues, and has umpired more than 270 Major 
League games. However, March 29th, 2018 marked his first 
regular-season game as a full-timer, and the beginning of a very 
exciting career chapter. 
 
Even while Stu was travelling to officiate in Major League 
Baseball, he and his wife, Danielle, still call the Queen City his 
home. This is the city where Scheurwater began his dream of 
being a Major League umpire. As a student at Balfour 
Collegiate, Stu was an avid sportsman, playing baseball and 
basketball, football, and sometimes dabbling in baseball. 
 
Before his professional career, Scheurwater was a member of 
the basketball Canadian national umpire program. He has 
worked in the 2005 baseball Canadian cup, and in 2006 
under-21 national championship. After 11 years in the majors, 
he progressed to the majors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope everyone will join me in congratulating Stu 
on his impressive accomplishment. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

World War II Veteran Celebrates 96th Birthday 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on April 
28th, Philip Favel of Sweetgrass First Nation celebrated his 
96th birthday, making him one of the oldest surviving World 
War II veterans. A party was held at the reserve’s community 
centre, complete with a birthday cake and a round dance to 
honour Mr. Favel. 
 
Mr. Favel served as a private in the armed forces in Europe 
during the war. Attending the celebration was General Jonathan 
Vance, chief of defence staff of the Canadian Armed Forces, 
and Perry Bellegarde, chief of the Assembly of First Nations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Favel recounted a few stories from his time in 
the armed forces. In 1942, he trained in England before landing 
on Juno Beach on D-Day. During the war he worked as a truck 
driver on the front lines, which at times was very dangerous. He 
recalled, “My windshield got smashed three times, but you had 

to keep going. You cannot run back.” Mr. Favel also took care 
of two children who were on the scene that day, which earned 
him a French medal to recognize his consideration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 
service and sacrifice of Philip Favel and all others who landed 
at D-Day to fight for our country. We are eternally grateful. 
Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Federal Pharmacare Program and Coverage of  
Prescription Drug Costs 

 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier was 
recently in Yellowknife where he signed a communiqué in 
support of a national pharmacare strategy. And that 
communiqué says, and I quote: “Western Premiers agree on the 
need to continue work on new ways to increase access and 
lower the cost of drugs for Canadians.” 
 
I was really pleased to see this advancement, especially since 
this declaration came just a few weeks after a 75-minute debate 
on pharmacare right here in this Assembly where members 
opposite spent their time arguing against universal pharmacare. 
I wasn’t really aware that the road to Damascus ran through 
Yellowknife, Mr. Speaker, but I’m thrilled that the Premier saw 
the light. 
 
And now that the Premier has signed the Western premiers’ 
communiqué on pharmacare, I’m wondering if he would also be 
willing to sign the letter that we prepared to the federal 
government’s pharmacare adviser, and join New Democrats in 
calling for a fully funded universal pharmacare program for all 
Canadians. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member opposite 
for the question. And I’ll make some comments, as I have 
before, on the work that’s been initiated by the federal 
government with respect to a national pharmacare program here 
in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve done 
one better than a joint-sign of a letter from a province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We attended a meeting yesterday with provinces from across 
Western and Northern Canada and territories . . . pardon me, 
Mr. Speaker, from across Western and Northern Canada to talk 
just about this topic. And the member opposite is right. Western 
premiers do agree on the need to continue the work, Mr. 
Speaker, on ensuring that we have access to our prescription 
drugs here in Western Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s four points of focus. Improving patient access should 
be the focus, as well as development on best available evidence, 
Mr. Speaker. Potential risks, as well as we want . . . provinces 
and territories, Mr. Speaker, must retain the responsibility for 
design and delivery. And federal funding must be available and 
must be ongoing, Mr. Speaker. 
 



May 24, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4369 

And I think it’s important to note that there is concern, Mr. 
Speaker, around that table — including in Saskatchewan — that 
any federal program would impact the already comprehensive 
program that we, drug program that we have here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We have a strong 
program. It’s as comprehensive as any province across the 
nation of Canada, Mr. Speaker. It’s a program that has evolved 
over decades, Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s a program that the 
people of the province can be very proud of. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The benefits of a 
universal pharmacare program are clear and well documented: 
better health outcomes, lower health system costs, fewer 
patients missing their medications, lower costs and higher 
productivity for business, and the list goes on. 
 
You know, it’s an issue that’s been studied endlessly and the 
results are very clear. Our health care system cannot fully 
deliver without universal pharmacare. But of course it has to be 
done right, as the members opposite have pointed out. It needs 
to improve upon existing programs. And our letter outlines the 
key principles that would make a truly universal, truly 
accessible pharmacare plan work for Saskatchewan patients. 
 
We know the provinces can’t do this on their own. Federal 
funding and leadership are needed here in Saskatchewan. We 
should be crystal clear in our call for a fully funded national 
pharmacare program with first-dollar coverage for all 
prescription drugs based on an evidence-based formulary. So 
I’m asking today: will the Premier join me in calling for that 
today and sign our letter, adding clear recommendations from 
Saskatchewan and making sure that the federal plan meets the 
need of Saskatchewan patients? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — And what I’m saying here today, Mr. 
Speaker, is this government under the previous premier and this 
Premier, Mr. Speaker, have done much more than sign any 
letter, Mr. Speaker, to the federal government. In fact, 
Saskatchewan under the previous premier was the co-lead along 
with Prince Edward Island, Mr. Speaker, on the health 
innovation working group, Mr. Speaker, which helped drive 
down drug costs by millions of dollars across the nation of 
Canada, including in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I do agree, and premiers around the table did agree, Mr. 
Speaker, that we do need a solid partner in the federal 
government — not just in a pharmacare program, not just in our 
drug coverage, Mr. Speaker, but in the health system in general, 
Mr. Speaker. At the point of inception, Mr. Speaker, here in the 
nation of Canada, our health coverage was a 50/50 . . . we had a 
50/50 partner with the federal government, Mr. Speaker, in this 
province, where now the federal government funding is down to 
about 21 per cent of our health care expenses here in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was noted later in the communiqué, Mr. Speaker, that the 
health needs of Canadians are not well served when provincial 
and territorial governments do not receive fair and sustainable 
funding through the Canada Health Transfer, Mr. Speaker. 

There is a broader conversation to happen here on the 
partnership between our federal government, our provinces, and 
territories, Mr. Speaker, on sharing health care costs in general, 
not just with a pharmacare program. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said, I’ve been 
pleased to see the significant development of the Premier’s 
position on pharmacare — originally so reluctant to discuss the 
topic, now joining with the Western premiers to call for some of 
the details in that strategy. 
 
Now that’s a good step, but I think we need to go further, look 
more and more into exactly how we do the best evidence-based, 
quality program. That’s really the basis of the letter we’ve put 
together. I’d be very happy to sit down with the Premier, 
Minister of Health, look in detail at how to make sure that that 
letter best influences the process that’s ongoing, Mr. Speaker. 
Happy to do that review. 
 
I’d also really encourage the Premier to consider a change, 
because we’ve seen a big increase in the premiums for seniors 
and the costs they’re paying, seniors often on five, six 
medications at a time, paying $25 per prescription. That adds up 
very quickly. So I guess now with this new-found intrigue and 
interest in pharmacare, will the Premier also be willing to 
review the amount that seniors are being forced to pay for those 
medications that they so dearly need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, I said this 
government, Mr. Speaker, under this Premier, under the 
previous premier, has gone far beyond sending a letter to the 
federal government, Mr. Speaker. We were co-lead on the 
health innovation working group, Mr. Speaker. I was 
representing the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, on a 
discussion on pharmacare yesterday in Yellowknife in the 
Northwest Territories, Mr. Speaker, and will be going to the 
Council of the Federation meeting where we’ll be discussing in 
further detail, Mr. Speaker, the opportunities that we have as a 
nation, Mr. Speaker, to move forward, ensuring that we are not 
being offered a program that is much less than the 
comprehensive program that we already have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that representation was also brought by our two Health 
ministers, Mr. Speaker, who just last week met with Mr. 
Hoskins, the lead, Mr. Speaker, on the national pharmacare 
program. Mr. Speaker, they explained in detail the 
comprehensive plan we have in the province of Saskatchewan. I 
believe Mr. Hoskins believed, with the vast reach of the plan 
here, Mr. Speaker, is it is a strong plan, among the strongest in 
the nation of Canada, Mr. Speaker, evolved over, you know, 
multiple governments and multiple decades, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But again, the people of this province can be proud of the 
representation that they have on this file, Mr. Speaker, and 
proud of the comprehensive plan that they have in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 



4370 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2018 

Global Transportation Hub and 
Government Transparency 

 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just to remind the 
Premier, the question was about the cost and growing cost for 
seniors of their prescriptions and the need to review that 
particular fee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday we had an opportunity to question 
current cabinet ministers and former Sask Party leadership 
candidates about where they stand when it comes to a judicial 
inquiry into the GTH [Global Transportation Hub], something 
they’d expressed enthusiasm for during the leadership race. 
Unfortunately the members opposite seem to have conveniently 
gone silent on the commitments they made just a few months 
ago. The GTH is failing to meet expectations, not because it’s a 
bad concept, but because this government has failed in so many 
ways in its responsibility to provide transparency to the public, 
failed to shine a light on the mismanagement that has gone on. 
And taxpayers, as a result, are being stuck with the bill. 
 
My question to the Premier is: will he take a cue from his 
fellow leadership contestants and commit to a judicial inquiry 
on the GTH as they did during the contest? Or will he join them 
and remain silent on this pressing issue? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
[10:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I appreciate 
the question on the Global Transportation Hub, Mr. Speaker, a 
generational investment on behalf of the people of the province 
of Saskatchewan that was started under the members opposite, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s been executed under members of this side of 
the government over the last decade, Mr. Speaker. And the 
importance of that facility, Mr. Speaker, is as important today 
as it has ever been, the free flow of goods in and out of our 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there have been questions — fair questions — around the 
land procurement in that area, Mr. Speaker. Those questions 
were referred, I believe, to the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner originally, then to the Provincial Auditor, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re now with Justice in the province of Manitoba, 
Mr. Speaker, as it’s been referred out of the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have never precluded that upon the return 
of a decision by the Department of Justice in Manitoba, Mr. 
Speaker, that there would not be further action. But we will be 
waiting until we hear back from the Department of Justice, Mr. 
Speaker. I never precluded further action, Mr. Speaker, but have 
also said that we wouldn’t be acting further until we have a 
reply, Mr. Speaker, from the Department of Justice in 
Manitoba. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Teacher Salaries and Capital Infrastructure 
in the Education Sector 

 
Ms. Beck: — Last week the Sask Party government appointed 
13 legislative secretaries, and with these appointments, those 13 

government backbenchers get top-ups to their salaries. But, Mr. 
Speaker, when it comes to our kids’ classrooms and the teachers 
who work with those kids every day, the Sask Party government 
doesn’t have the same generosity. 
 
They’ve refused to commit to funding the teachers’ contract, 
Mr. Speaker, that this will be an agreement that’s bargained in 
good faith with teachers across the province — whereas the 
raises that they gave to their own colleagues were done with the 
stroke of a pen behind closed doors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the Sask Party government justify giving 
themselves salary top-ups when they refuse to fund the 
teachers’ contracts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I’ve stood in 
this House on a number of occasions to talk about the teachers’ 
contract, Mr. Speaker, which we have agreed that we will 
negotiate in good faith, Mr. Speaker. We’ll participate at the 
table during arbitration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But to suggest that this government hasn’t made a commitment 
to kids’ classrooms, Mr. Speaker, is laughable. We’ve 
committed $30 million in this budget, Mr. Speaker, in addition 
to the $7.5 million in in-year funding that was provided to 
school divisions, Mr. Speaker, prior to the introduction of the 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ll continue to have conversations with teachers, Mr. 
Speaker, with school boards, Mr. Speaker. It’s our intention to 
make sure that we meet the requirements, meet the needs of 
children in the classroom, Mr. Speaker, and that’s going to be 
an ongoing conversation that we have, Mr. Speaker, with 
trustees, with parents, and with teachers, Mr. Speaker. And 
when there’s a contract to consider, Mr. Speaker, this side of 
the House, Mr. Speaker, will consider that contract. And I can 
guarantee you one thing, Mr. Speaker. Teachers will be paid. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — It’s good to know that the teachers will be paid, 
Mr. Speaker. But the question is, will this government fully 
fund that payment? The fact is that they are topping-up their 
backbenchers’ salaries. In 2016, the Sask Party government 
refused to fully fund the teachers’ contracts, costing school 
boards $9 million . . . 
 
[Interjections.] 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — That was a move that cost school boards $9 
million. And school divisions were forced to cut resources from 
their classrooms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is students who suffer when this government 
refuses to fund those contracts. Although bargaining is ongoing 
in Saskatchewan, the Sask Party government controls the purse 
strings for education and, to date, they’ve refused to fully 
commit to fund this contract. The minister can spin it all he 
wants, but it’s on them. When can we expect a full commitment 



May 24, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4371 

to fully fund that teachers’ contract? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Just to correct the member, Mr. Speaker, 
this government has not refused to fund the teachers’ contract, 
Mr. Speaker. When that contract is presented, Mr. Speaker, 
whether it’s negotiated at the table, Mr. Speaker, or whether a 
presentation is made through the arbitration process, Mr. 
Speaker, we will give full consideration to that process, Mr. 
Speaker. But at the present time there is no contract to fund. 
And when there is one, Mr. Speaker, we will give due 
consideration to that contract, Mr. Speaker, and the 
responsibilities of this government, Mr. Speaker, to make sure 
that we fund public education properly, Mr. Speaker. That 
includes classrooms, Mr. Speaker. That includes the teachers, 
Mr. Speaker. So we will give consideration once that contract is 
presented, Mr. Speaker, for ratification, and we’ll give it full 
consideration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, our teachers deserve better. Our 
school boards deserve better, and moreover, our kids deserve 
better. They shouldn’t be second in line to the Sask Party 
government backbenchers. 
 
And with all the rain this morning, the infrastructure issues at 
Argyle School are more evident than ever. Water is pouring 
inside the school through the windows, through the walls. 
Water fountains are spilling over with backed-up water, and 
children’s art projects on the walls are getting sopping wet. 
 
We’ve asked before but we’ve heard no real answers. What is 
the plan to deal with infrastructure issues in our schools, and 
how long will these students have to sit in these conditions? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I was made aware of the 
issues at Argyle School this morning, Mr. Speaker, but I can tell 
you that the school division — and I’ve quoted this on the floor 
of the House before — the school division has said, well this is 
one of our older schools; it continues to be repaired at a level 
that we can afford without compromising the safety of anyone 
in the building, Mr. Speaker, and there’s no structural issues 
with the building at Argyle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can tell you this, Mr. Speaker. For the opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, to question this government’s commitment on 
education capital is another laughable question, Mr. Speaker. 
Look at the commitments that this government has made to 
education capital, Mr. Speaker, in this city alone — École St. 
Elizabeth, St. Kateri, St. Nicholas, École Wascana Plains, École 
Harbour Landing, Plainsview, Sacred Heart, École Connaught, 
and Scott Collegiate, Mr. Speaker. This is our commitment. 
 
We know that there are some challenges with a number of 
schools in this city, Mr. Speaker. We continue to work with 
school divisions in developing our capital plan, Mr. Speaker. 
This school is on our capital plan, Mr. Speaker, for 
replacement, and as we move forward, in developing future 
budgets, Mr. Speaker, due consideration will be given to the 

replacement of the school. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Rental Housing Supplement and Support for 
People with Disabilities 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Deputy Premier 
should say that to the students at Argyle School or the parents 
over at Argyle School. 
 
Last week I asked the minister to speak to his cuts to the rental 
housing supplement, cuts that target people with disabilities 
who face real barriers to access housing that meets their needs. 
And again he chose not to answer the question and offered a red 
herring about vacancy rates. 
 
So I’ll ask again, Mr. Speaker. Of the 3,000 units that are 
apparently vacant, how many of those are designed for people 
with disabilities? And of those specialized units, how many are 
vacant? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I have 
discussed in this House many times, and out in the rotunda and 
in committee, the rental market has changed, Mr. Speaker. We 
have seen a 9 per cent vacancy rate in the rental market, Mr. 
Speaker. This is a very prudent time that we look at all of the 
supplements and to see if there are some opportunities for us to 
be able to redirect some of that funds. 
 
What we have been able to do, Mr. Speaker, in this budget I am 
very proud of, is to be able to commit $10.4 million to those 
who are most vulnerable in our communities. We’re able to 
work with the community-based organizations for the disability 
side of things, Mr. Speaker, and we’re very proud of what 
we’ve done on that side of things. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, no answer to a very basic 
question again, and people living with disabilities deserve an 
answer to that. This government’s analysis of the available 
housing stock — we hear it again today — simply isn’t 
accurate, and it ignores the unique needs of people living with 
disabilities. Those who are living on income assistance 
programs in Saskatchewan are faced with discrimination, 
unable to find adequate housing, and experience homelessness 
at alarming rates in this province. 
 
So I’ll ask the minister another question that I asked him last 
week. Can the minister guarantee that people living with 
disabilities who need this government’s support will be offered 
a housing unit that meets their need within the housing 
authority? And most importantly, why doesn’t he just reverse 
this callous cut? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want 
to get on the record, Mr. Speaker, some of the investments that 
we have had in our housing: 724 million to develop 11,000 



4372 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2018 

units, Mr. Speaker; an additional 56 million to repair 4,300 
units, Mr. Speaker. One of the things that we are extremely 
proud of is the units that we have built for the transition of 
Valley View, Mr. Speaker. We have taken Valley View, which 
was an aging facility, and allocated funds all across 
Saskatchewan for people to be able to move back within their 
communities. 
 
If the member opposite is questioning our commitment to the 
people with disability in housing, I would ask him just to look 
at the transition of Valley View, how that has been over the last 
few years. And, Mr. Speaker, if he has any more questions, I’d 
be more than happy to answer them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s pathetic. We’ve asked 
these questions that are direct and straightforward, and not a 
single answer from that minister. Of the apparent 3,000 vacant 
units, how many of those are designed for people living with 
disabilities? And secondly, will he assure people living with 
disabilities that need government support, that they’ll receive a 
housing unit that meets their needs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, we work with all of our 
clients on a case-by-case basis to be able to meet their needs. 
The 3,000 chronically vacant units that we have are all across 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We have units in Saskatoon and in 
Regina that are chronically vacant. And we will continue to 
work with our clients to be able to meet their basic needs, Mr. 
Speaker, and that includes people with disabilities and also 
people with families, Mr. Speaker, single individual units, as 
well as seniors, Mr. Speaker. We work with our clients on an 
ongoing basis to be able to meet their needs. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Another response, another non-answer, 
Mr. Speaker. Of the 3,000 units that are apparently vacant, how 
many of those are designed for people with disabilities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I did answer the 
question. I answered it two or three times, Mr. Speaker. Out of 
the 3,000 units that are across our province, we have an aging 
inventory within Sask Housing, Mr. Speaker. We have sold 
units to be able to repurpose those for single moms, also for 
people with disabilities. 
 
If the member from Saskatoon Centre wants to keep chirping at 
me from his seat, Mr. Speaker . . . The member opposite also 
had six hours in committee to ask me these questions, and I 
answered every question that he asked. I tabled documents that 
the member asked for during committee, Mr. Speaker. This is 
the first time that this member has got to his feet and asked this 
question, Mr. Speaker, and I’d really like to know why he 
didn’t ask that in the six hours that we had in committee. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Youth Employment 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we saw pathetic responses 
from that minister in committee. This question was asked to that 
minister last week. He needs to tune in, be attentive to his file, 
and answer to the most vulnerable in this province. 
 
But shifting gears just a little bit, instead of more nonsense from 
that minister, more non-answers, Mr. Speaker, shifting gears. 
As we head into these summer months, many post-secondary 
students are relying on their summer jobs to try and make 
enough money so that they can pay for their next year of school. 
And with the cost of living increasing and tuition costs 
increasing, students will need to work even more to try to save 
up enough money. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, youth employment has dropped drastically 
over the last year, making it harder and harder for students to 
find jobs and to fund their education at a time where tuition fees 
have been hiked in significant ways because of the cuts of that 
government. Mr. Speaker, how will students be able to save for 
school, that ever-increasing cost of school, if they can’t find a 
summer job? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the fact of the 
matter is that we have seen record employment growth in this 
province that has benefited everybody in this province over the 
course of the last decade. Over 60,000 jobs have been created 
over that period of time, Mr. Speaker, the second-best job 
creation record in the entirety of the country, Mr. Speaker. And 
you contrast that with the members opposite, in their last decade 
in government, who had the worst job creation record of any 
party of any government in the entire country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m happy to talk about the economic record of this 
government, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to talk about the 160,000 
newcomers that have made Saskatchewan their home over the 
course of the last decade, a rate of growth that we have seen in 
this province not since the 1930s, Mr. Speaker. Contrast that 
rate of population growth with their record, Mr. Speaker, of 
out-migration, of people having to flee this province. You want 
to talk about youth employment. Mr. Speaker, on this side of 
the House, we’ve actually created jobs on this side of the 
House. On that side of the House, they’ve chased youth out of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Demonstration Outside Legislative Building 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For months, Mr. 
Speaker, in fact for this entire legislative session, concerned 
citizens of our province have been camped outside the 
Legislative Building, raising their concerns about our justice 
system, our child welfare system, and the impact of colonialism 
in our province. I’ve been there a few times to meet with the 
folks who are camped there and I know other members from 
both sides of the Assembly have been out as well, gathering 
informally, discussing what’s on their minds. 



May 24, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4373 

[10:45] 
 
In meeting with them again today, really what I heard from the 
people who are staying there is that they want to meet with the 
Premier. They want to sit down and just have a conversation 
with the Premier. Nothing fancy, nothing formal, just meet with 
the Premier. It’s a simple request and a request for which 
they’ve been patient, persistent, and respectful. Mr. Speaker, 
after question period I’m going to head out again. I’m going to 
head down the steps of the Legislative Building and go and visit 
with the folks who are sitting there, hear their concerns, and see 
how we can walk forward together in the spirit of 
reconciliation. 
 
I’m just wondering if the Premier would be willing to join me. 
Is this a point, Mr. Speaker, on which the Premier and I could 
find some common ground, work to walk forward in 
reconciliation together, go and sit down and have a 
conversation with these folks who’ve been waiting so patiently 
for that discussion? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 
question, Mr. Speaker. I’d first like to say that we value the 
health and safety of everyone who uses Wascana Centre and we 
recognize the freedom of expression as a fundamental right. 
Wascana Centre is home to hundreds of events and rallies and 
even demonstrations every year. And we have a number of 
bylaws and policies in place that restrict camping, fires, 
signage, and setting up structures. A permit is required for all 
activities. 
 
And indeed we have been in contact with the group outside. 
They have asked for a meeting. If members would be quiet, I 
would answer their question. Absolutely, Mr. Speaker, they 
have asked for a meeting. The Minister of Justice and I have 
agreed to meet with them and we’ve proposed a number of 
dates. I understand that we’ve come to an agreement. Next 
week we will sit down and talk about it. 
 
But in the fundamental question about Wascana Park, there 
needs to be maintenance. We will be turning sprinklers on and 
things like that, so they will have to move out. The Minister of 
Government Relations has had respectful meetings with First 
Nations on many different levels and will continue to do so. We 
look forward to the meeting next week. Thank you. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Committee of the 
Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
instructed by the Standing Committee on the Economy to report 
that it has considered certain estimates and to present its fifth 
report. I move: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy be now concurred in. 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on the Economy: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy be now concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
92, The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, 
2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill, and the bill be now read 
the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 92 and 
that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may now proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 92 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move the bill be now read a third and 
passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — Moved by the minister that Bill No. 92 be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 



4374 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2018 

this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
93, The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and the bill be now read 
the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 93, and 
that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 93 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 
Holding Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move the bill be now read the third 
time and the bill be passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 93 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to question 287. 

The Speaker: — Tabled, 287. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 288 through 289. 
 
The Speaker: — Ordered, 288, 289. Sorry, is the Government 
Whip done with written questions? 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to question 290. 
 
The Speaker: — Ordered, 290. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to question 291. 
 
The Speaker: — Ordered, 291. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to question 292. 
 
The Speaker: — Ordered, 292. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to question 293. 
 
The Speaker: — Ordered, 293. I recognize the Deputy House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
facilitate the work of committee both this morning and this 
afternoon, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Government House Leader has 
moved to adjourn the House. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned until 
Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 10:53.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4365 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4365 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4365 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4365 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4365 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4365 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4366 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 2018 Cathedral Village Arts Festival 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4366 
 Saskatoon Plaque Honours Afghanistan Veterans 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4366 
 Congress of the Humanities and Social Sciences at the University of Regina 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4367 
 Saskatchewan Team Wins World Senior Curling Championship 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4367 
 Rotary Clubs of Saskatoon Dedicated to Service Above Self 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4367 
 Saskatchewan Umpire Becomes Major League Official 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4368 
 World War II Veteran Celebrates 96th Birthday 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4368 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Federal Pharmacare Program and Coverage of Prescription Drug Costs 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4368 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4368 
 Global Transportation Hub and Government Transparency 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4370 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4370 
 Funding for Teacher Salaries and Capital Infrastructure in the Education Sector 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4370 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4370 
 Rental Housing Supplement and Support for People with Disabilities 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4371 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4371 
 Youth Employment 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4372 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4372 
 Demonstration Outside Legislative Building 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4372 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4373 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4373 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4374 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 92 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4373 
 Bill No. 93 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4374 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4374 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


