


















































May 16, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 60A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 16, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4307 
 May 16, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Hindley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to this Legislative Assembly, it is an honour today to 
introduce a group in the west gallery, a group of Swift Current 
Broncos fans who are here to warm up the city a little bit early 
for the Memorial Cup this weekend. 
 
Actually it’s a group of 38 grade 4 students from O.M. Irwin 
Middle School in Swift Current. They are accompanied by their 
teachers, Karen Schommer and Mark Siemens; educational 
assistant Carlin Lee; and the parent chaperones who are part of 
the trip to the Queen City today, Courtney Leshures, Tara 
Moen, Chris Wiebe, Maureen Hanson, Anthony Klimm, Darla 
Bailey, and Leah Tait is there as well. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome this great school class from 
Swift Current to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Stonebridge-Dakota. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery I 
am thrilled to welcome 40 grade 7 and 8 students from St. 
Kateri Tekakwitha School from my home constituency in 
Stonebridge in Saskatoon. With them are their teachers, Trevor 
Neufeld, Shelbi Mackinnon; and chaperones Brooke Sittler, Sue 
Lysager, and Dorelle Ritchie. If you could all give a wave. 
 
St. Kateri is one of two brand new joint-use schools in 
Stonebridge which, along with Chief Whitecap School, I was so 
pleased to help open last fall. I still have the official programs 
in my office, Mr. Speaker. It’s a beautiful school and it’s really 
the new heart of one of the fastest growing subdivisions in the 
city, which is attracting so many new families and their 
children. 
 
I met with these students earlier. We had a great chat. They had 
some great questions. Certainly I hope they enjoy their day, and 
yes they did get ice cream. Yes, they did. Mr. Speaker, please 
join me in welcoming them, their teachers, and chaperones to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I would also like to 
introduce, in your gallery, my constituency assistant Carrie 
Zdunich, who is here visiting today with her daughter-in-law 
Tammy Zdunich and her grandkids Jack, Sully, and Piper, who 
is such a beautiful dancer. 
 
I’m so fortunate to have Carrie as my partner in the beautiful 
constituency of Stonebridge-Dakota. She brings such a wealth 
of experience with her, is so amazing with people. We first 
started working together during the campaign two years ago, 
and I remember she charged into my office one day with a 

ladder and some duct tape and whipped it into shape, and the 
place was never the same again. And the rest is history, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Things just roll along so amazingly smoothly and professionally 
with her at the helm of the constituency office. And I know it’s 
a bit of an ongoing thing, but she really is the best constituency 
assistant. I’m so glad that she could make it down today with 
members of her family, and she could put faces to people here 
in the building whom she’s in contact with every day. Please 
join me, Mr. Speaker, in welcoming my friend Carrie Zdunich 
and her family to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, seated in the east gallery, I see a bright light and 
an academic within our province seated in your gallery, Dr. Jim 
Farney, a leader out at the faculty of politics and international 
studies at the University of Regina. I welcome him to his 
Assembly here today and I ask all members to do the same. 
 
And while still on my feet, in advance of the Memorial Cup, I 
want to welcome the Swift Current Broncos fans to Regina Pats 
territory. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
University. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I just want to join with the member from Regina 
Rosemont to invite my former colleague Dr. Jim Farney to his 
Legislative Assembly. I’m looking very much forward to 
attending Congress, of which you’re playing a key role, coming 
up here at the University of Regina. And I’d like to just 
welcome you again. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Silverspring-Sutherland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
join with the Minister of Energy and Resources in welcoming 
Carrie and Tammy and Jack and Sullivan and Piper to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Tammy and her family have been long-standing friends. Her 
and her husband, Scott, have been long-standing friends of my 
wife and I. And very proud of the work that Tammy’s done. 
She was actually our photographer at our wedding, and her 
husband, Scott, had about all three kids climbing over him with 
cameras on at the same time while he was taking pictures. 
 
But most importantly, what Tammy’s been doing lately, Mr. 
Speaker, is she has started up an organization called The Well 
Collaborative. And I’ll just give you their mission statement 
here, Mr. Speaker, because I think it’s very important. Their 
mission statement is: 
 

Our passion is to see women rooted in belonging. Our 
space is built upon love, understanding, compassion, and 
celebration. We are a family, a movement, a culture: we 
gather together as a sea of voices . . . [and] become a wave 



4308 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2018 

of change. 
 
So I want to thank Tammy for all that she’s doing in Saskatoon 
for the businesswomen in Saskatoon and welcome them all to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the House, I’d like to once again 
introduce my wife, who happens to be up here for a couple days 
to spend a little time with me. So I’d ask you all to welcome 
her. Thank you. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition calling on the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 
stop the Sask Party cuts on our kids’ already strained 
classrooms. Those who have signed this petition wish to draw 
our attention to a number of things. First that the Sask Party cut 
$54 million from our kids’ classrooms in last year’s devastating 
budget, and that this year’s budget only restores a fraction of 
those cuts. Of course those cuts have had devastating impact on 
classrooms all around the province and have contributed to the 
loss of programs and increased class sizes to name of couple of 
the impacts. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the government to fully restore the senseless cuts to our 
kids’ classrooms and stop making families, teachers, and 
everyone who works to support our education system pay 
the price for the Sask Party’s mismanagement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Denzil, Kindersley, Kerrobert, Eston, and Biggar. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. I so present. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition to get big money out of 
Saskatchewan politics. And the undersigned residents of the 
province of Saskatchewan want to bring to our attention the 
following: that Saskatchewan’s outdated election Act allows 
corporations, unions, and individuals, even those living outside 
the province, to make unlimited donations to our province’s 
political parties. And you know, Mr. Speaker, that the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve to live in a fair province where all voices 
are equal and money can’t influence politics. We know, Mr. 
Speaker, that over the past 10 years the Saskatchewan Party has 
received $12.61 million in corporate donations and of that, 
$2.87 million come from companies outside Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan politics should belong to 
Saskatchewan people. And we know that the federal 
government, provinces of Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, Nova 
Scotia, and now British Columbia have moved to limit this 
influence and level the playing field by banning corporate and 
union donations to political parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer now: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party government to overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign 
finance laws to end out-of-province donations, to put a ban 
on donations from corporations and unions, and to put a 
donation limit on individual donations. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise yet again today 
to present a petition calling for critical workplace supports for 
survivors of domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has 
the very dubious distinction of having the highest rates of 
intimate partner violence amongst all of the provinces. And we 
know we must do so much more to protect survivors of 
domestic violence. 
 
For many who experience that violence, the violence will 
follow them to their workplace, which is why the signatories to 
this petition are calling for five days of paid leave and up to 17 
weeks of unpaid leave be made available to workers who are 
survivors of domestic violence, and that critical workplace 
supports be made available to survivors of domestic violence 
should also be made available to workers living with 
post-traumatic stress disorder as a result of domestic violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what those who are on the front lines of this 
crisis are calling for. This is what we’ve also called for in a 
private member’s bill, Bill No. 609, the fourth time we’ve put 
forward these provisions in the last two years. It’s time for the 
government to step up to the plate, do the right thing, and pass 
those provisions. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 



May 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4309 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to pass legislation to ensure 
critical supports in the workplace, including reasonable 
accommodation and paid and unpaid leave for survivors of 
domestic violence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition today come 
from Regina. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Saskatoon Hosts Cinergie Festival 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to rise today 
to read a statement about the international francophone festival 
Cinergie. 
 
Cette dernière semaine a eu lieu le 13ième édition de Cinergie, 
le festival international du film francophone à Saskatoon au 
Roxy Theatre. Il s’agit du seul festival de film francophone en 
Saskatchewan ayant pour mandat de faire la promotion du 
cinéma francophone dans la province. 
 
Douze films du Canada et du monde entier ont été présentés. De 
courts métrages avant chaque long métrage visaient également à 
souligner le travail de plusieurs cinéastes canadiens-français. 
Cette année, Cinergie a aussi organisé un avant-première 
spéciale du premier épisode de Cow-boy Urbain, un 
documentaire mettant en scène le village de St-Denis en 
Saskatchewan qui sera diffusé officiellement le 21 mai prochain 
sur Unis. 
 
De plus, toujours dans le cadre du festival, Cinergie a invité des 
écoles enseignants le français à une projection d’un des films 
avec leurs élèves — entre eux mon fils Abraham, qui a fort 
apprécie le film Khumba — suivi d’une discussion 
accompagnée d’un dossier pédagogique après chaque film. 
 
Finalement, la programmation du festivale était bilingue, en 
anglais et en français, afin d’encourager les non-francophones à 
participer et à se sensibiliser la culture francophone. 
 
 [Translation: This past week the 13th edition of Cinergie, an 
international francophone film festival, took place in Saskatoon 
at the Roxy Theatre. It is the only francophone film festival in 
Saskatchewan, and its mandate is the promotion of francophone 
cinema in the province. 
 
Twelve films from Canada and the world over were presented. 
A short film before each feature film aimed to also highlight the 
work of many French Canadian filmmakers. This year Cinergie 
also organized a special pre-release showing of the first episode 
of Cow-boy Urbain, a documentary set in the village of 
St-Denis, Saskatchewan, which will be officially released on 
May 21st on Unis. 
 
As well, in the festival setting, Cinergie invited schools that 
teach in French to a showing of the films with their students — 
among them my son Abraham, who really enjoyed the film 
Khumba — accompanied by an educational discussion 

following each film. 
 
Finally, the festival programming was bilingual, in English and 
French, to encourage non-francophones to participate and to 
learn about francophone culture.] 
 
I ask the members present to join me in celebrating Cinergie 
and the francophone community in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Pasqua. 
 

Beginning of Ramadan 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to start with 
the Arabic phrase, as salaam alaikum:  
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Arabic.] 
 
To all my Muslim brothers and sisters around the world. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And today I rise to acknowledge an 
important time of the year for those practising the Muslim faith. 
Tonight at sunset, the holy month of Ramadan will begin. When 
the thin crescent moon appears in the sky, the Muslims will 
begin to keep obligatory fasting, as it marks a new month in the 
Islamic calendar. 
 
The key teachings during the month are sacrifice selflessly, 
donate generously, and to pray at midnight. In this holy 
Ramadan we, our family, along with our faith community, will 
join more than one and half billion Muslims across the world, 
along with the Minister of Justice, fasting between dawn and 
sunset. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, fasting is not new in Islam, and it has been in 
existence before Islam in other religions as well. The purpose of 
fasting is to get the pleasure of God and bring smiles on other 
faces. Experiencing hunger is secondary in fasting, but it really 
changes your perspective to see how many people live in this 
world. Mr. Speaker, fasting is one of the five pillars of Islam, 
which is the foundation of our religion. 
 
During the fasting, we will commit to prayer and focus on those 
less fortunate. We look forward to spending time with our 
family and giving to charities, and also look forward to the 
celebration of Eid al-Fitr at the end of Ramadan month. Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask that all members of the Assembly please 
join me in acknowledging the beginning of Ramadan. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Sexual Assault Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, May 14th to 18th is Sexual Assault 
Awareness Week in Saskatchewan. The focus of the week is to 
raise public awareness about sexual assault, violence, and the 
services available in communities around this province that 
support survivors. As communities and as a province, we must 
stand against sexual assault and remain committed to creating 
awareness and sharing information about support services that 



4310 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2018 

are available for survivors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2018 theme is Ask for Consent, and this is a 
vital aspect in preventing sexual assault. Organizations around 
the province will be raising awareness and having important 
discussions about consent, stressing that consent is not simply 
the absence of “no” and that consent can be revoked at any 
time. And it is so important that we share information about 
what is and is not consent. 
 
Saskatchewan has the second-highest rate of self-reported 
sexual assaults per capita in all of Canada. The Me Too 
movement has helped break down the stigma around sexual 
assault, and many more people are recognizing that they are not 
alone. But we need to address the cracks in our justice system 
and make sure that people are educated about consent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is also clear that we need to ensure proper 
government funding for support services here in Saskatchewan, 
and we must push for action from government and in our 
communities to change our unacceptable record when it comes 
to sexual assault.  
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Royal United Services Institute Victory Ball 
 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend I 
had the honour of attending the Royal United Services Institute 
victory ball, as well as the member from Regina Douglas Park.  
 
This event marks the anniversary of VE [Victory in Europe] 
Day, when the Allies claimed victory in Europe during World 
War II. It was May 8th, 1945, 73 years ago that millions of 
people gathered in the streets of Europe, North America, 
Russia, and nations around the globe to celebrate the enemy’s 
unconditional surrender. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of civilian and military dignitaries 
attended the ball, including Regina Mayor Michael Fougere; 
former Lieutenant Governor Vaughn Schofield; 15 Wing 
Moose Jaw commander, Colonel O’Reilly; HMCS [Her 
Majesty’s Canadian Ship] Queen commander, 
Lieutenant-Commander Trent Nichols, among others. 
 
The ball included a great dinner and impactful speeches. I’d like 
to acknowledge one individual in particular, the president of the 
board of directors of the Royal United Services Institute of 
Regina, retired Major Brad Hrycyna. Not only was his board 
crucial in putting on the ball, but the major gave moving 
remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this entire Assembly, I want to thank 
everyone involved in making this ball a success and giving us a 
chance to reflect back on the sacrifices of the soldiers during the 
Second World War, including the more than 44,000 brave 
Canadian soldiers who made the ultimate sacrifice. We will 
never forget. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

Melfort Archery Champions Hit the Mark 
 
Mr. Goudy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Melfort Archery 
continues to focus on building character and changing lives. 
The National Archery in Schools program aims at improving 
and motivating educational performance in grade 4 to 12 
students. Through archery our students are learning focus, 
self-control, discipline, patience, and the life lessons required to 
succeed in the classroom and in life. 
 
Maude Burke School in Melfort was one of the initial schools 
back in 2008 to come on board with this vision, a program that 
focuses on positive communication, developing role models, 
and the use of archery as a motivational tool, building 
self-esteem, personal growth, and work ethic in the lives of the 
students. The provincial tournament held in Melville this year 
saw over 700 archers participate, and the national shoot had 830 
archers from across Canada competing in Regina. 
 
The Maude Burke students were victorious both on provincial 
and national levels this year, making it the fourth straight year 
of their reign, an amazing feat for those young archers. Special 
mention to Donavin Linden, the elementary provincial 
champion; Harris Kellington, the middle years provincial 
champion; and Kalia Gray, who earned the top spot as the 
elementary girl for our country this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would ask that everyone in the Assembly join me in 
congratulating these archers and the people like Randy Steciuk 
and Garrett Wehrkamp, who through their vision and 
commitment are helping our kids hit the mark, both in sport and 
in life. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar-Sask 
Valley. 
 

Senior Girls’ Basketball Team Takes Silver 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud today to 
recognize the Lord Asquith senior girls’ basketball team for a 
very successful 2017-18 season. The team included players 
from two schools, Perdue School and Asquith School. Their 
impressive season consisted of 26 practices, 8 mid-week games, 
5 weekend tournaments, with only four losses. A lot of fun and 
hard work put the team in a good position going into the 
playoffs. 
 
They were able to win their way to Hoopla, the provincial 
tournament that only 36 teams across Saskatchewan qualified 
for. Mr. Speaker, the girls played hard and ended with a silver 
medal, taking second place in the 2A tournament. Not only did 
they place second, this amazing group of ladies also received 
the SHSAA [Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic Association] 
Sportsmanship Award for girl’s basketball, which is awarded to 
a team that has been nominated by other players or teams in the 
league who played against them during the tournament. Earning 
the Sportsmanship Award is something these girls can be proud 
of, knowing they gave it their all with class and respect for the 
competitors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask that everyone in this Assembly join me in 
congratulating the Lord Asquith senior girls’ basketball team on 
their achievements, both as a team that plays with integrity and 



May 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4311 

on their silver medal win. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 

Business Is a Staple in Prince Albert Community 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m proud today to rise and acknowledge a business in Prince 
Albert, and that one is the local Tim Hortons and its owner, Ed 
Zaparaniuk. Since the opening of his first location on 2nd 
Avenue West in 1992, Tims has become a staple for the 
community. Like countless other cities and towns across the 
province and nation, residents of P.A. [Prince Albert] have 
come to rely on that fresh cup of coffee to perk them up in the 
morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier this month I had the privilege of attending 
the official grand opening of a newly constructed building on 
the location. There were a number of dignitaries at the opening, 
but the most unique would have been Henry Adema. Henry was 
the first customer served at this location 26 years ago and, 
fittingly at the time, he was a police officer. But I don’t think 
that there’s any better testament to the quality of service than a 
26-year repeat customer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must acknowledge the owner, Ed Zaparaniuk, 
again. Ed owns three different Tim Hortons in Prince Albert 
and employs 150 people. His commitment to his community 
has been very impressive. His new building is modern and 
sleek, but still maintains the warm and inviting atmosphere to 
take a break, enjoy life, and meet up with friends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the entire Assembly, I want to 
congratulate Ed and all his staff at the Tim Hortons on their 
new building. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Donations to Political Parties 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over the 
spring we’ve seen Kevin Doherty and Brad Wall move on to 
greener pastures. They’re working for corporate Calgary now. 
And that’s fine. That’s their choice. But we here in this 
Assembly shouldn’t be. 
 
However, with our province’s outdated and broken campaign 
finance laws that allow unlimited corporate and out-of-province 
donations, Saskatchewan people are calling for change. Why, 
Mr. Speaker, does the Sask Party not want to get big money out 
of Saskatchewan politics? Why won’t they support our bill to 
end corporate and union donations? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we think it’s imperative 
that the members of the public know and understand who’s 
donating to which political parties. That’s the way it is under 
our legislation. I think it’s good for the members of the public 
to have a look and see who is participating in that process. All 

donations over $250 are publicly reported as required under our 
legislation. 
 
The opposition would like to claim that we’re supported by a 
very few large donors but, Mr. Speaker, that’s simply not the 
case. A thousand corporations donated to the Sask Party. Their 
average donation was about $1,000 each. Sask Party is not 
funded by a few large donors, as they claim, but by a number of 
small donations from a lot of people under the province. 
 
Under our Act, no political party can accept a contribution from 
a contributor who resides outside of Canada. Western Canada 
has got businesses that carry on in Saskatchewan, in Alberta, in 
BC [British Columbia], in Manitoba, people that have moved 
back and forth. And, Mr. Speaker, we respect their right to 
make donations. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Transparency about 
who donates only takes us so far. And that transparency to the 
public is not all that the public wants. Getting big money out of 
our democratic process isn’t just the right thing to do, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s also what the people of Saskatchewan want. 
Sixty-nine per cent of Saskatchewan people think that 
out-of-province donations should be banned, and six out of ten 
think that corporations and unions shouldn’t be allowed to 
donate at all. 
 
People are increasingly cynical about how politics works in this 
province and this is a chance for the Sask Party to do the right 
thing. With so many unanswered questions about Bill Boyd, 
about the GTH [Global Transportation Hub], about profits for 
Sask Party supporters influencing Sask Party decisions, this is 
an opportunity to clear the air and send a clear message to the 
public. Why doesn’t the minister agree with the vast majority of 
Saskatchewan people who think it’s time to fix our broken 
campaign laws? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not being lobbied on 
this right now at all. Mr. Speaker, look, we talk about this thing 
periodically in the House, but I don’t hear it in coffee shops. I 
don’t hear it on the street. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what I do notice from the different reports 
that are filed is that the Leader of the Opposition felt quite 
comfortable taking out-of-province donations in his leadership 
campaign. And, Mr. Speaker, while we’re talking about it, 60 
per cent of his donations came from only 12 wealthy 
individuals. That’s what we’re seeing for their conduct. If they 
want to see something different, the Leader of the Opposition is 
welcome to turn around and give that money back. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As New Democrats, we 
follow the rules. But those rules need to change. Those rules 
need to change, Mr. Speaker. If the Sask Party is so worried 
about donations we’ve received from working people, they can 
support our bill tomorrow afternoon and end corporate and 
union donations in this province once and for all, Mr. Speaker. 



4312 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2018 

These are common sense proposals. 
 
And in Saskatchewan, our democratic process should be 
controlled by the people of Saskatchewan, not by big money 
donations or out-of-province donations. This is something other 
provinces and the federal government have addressed long ago, 
Mr. Speaker. And it’s time for Saskatchewan and this 
government to get with the times. 
 
Our bill would put a cap on donations, ban corporate and union 
donations, end out-of-province donations. What is the Sask 
Party afraid of? What is it that they don’t like about restoring 
trust in Saskatchewan politics? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if that’s what the members 
opposite want, they’re welcome to give their donations back. 
They’re welcome not to take them. But, Mr. Speaker, they take 
them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Rosemont, who 
was a leadership candidate, said and I quote, “I would accept 
union money until the laws are fixed and we level the playing 
field for all.” He went on to say, “This is not a time to tie our 
hands behind our back in a . . . important fight.” Later on he 
said, a different time he said, “Saskatchewan’s democracy 
should be for Saskatchewan people, free from questions of 
influence from corporate or union donors . . .” Mr. Speaker, 
that’s the member for Regina Rosemont. Then you got the 
Leader of the Opposition takes his campaign from 12 wealthy 
donors, and then he wants to come in here and be 
sanctimonious. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’re hearing in coffee shops is people are 
worried about pipelines; they’re worried about carbon tax; 
they’re worried about equalization; they’re worried about the 
future of the province. Mr. Speaker, we’ve got an open, 
transparent plan. We report the donations and that’s the 
direction we’re going on this side of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Release of Information on Global Transportation Hub 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, speaking of openness and 
transparency from that minister, day after day the Minister of 
Justice refuses to do the right thing and the easy thing and 
release the GTH documents that they’ve been told to release by 
the freedom of information and the Privacy Commissioner. But 
with each passing day, the minister’s answers give more and 
more cause for concern. Yesterday he said, “If people aren’t 
satisfied with those recommendations, they have the ability to 
reply to the Court of Queen’s Bench.” 
 
Really, Mr. Speaker? Does the Minister of Justice really expect 
Saskatchewan people to spend thousands of dollars suing the 
GTH in the Court of Queen’s Bench just to access records the 
commissioner has already said should be released? Why won’t 
they just release the documents? 
 
[14:00] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, a year ago the members 
opposite were taking issue with what was going on. They were 
saying, oh, the Provincial Auditor said this; the Provincial 
Auditor has said that. And we had this big issue. They didn’t 
like what the Provincial Auditor said because the Provincial 
Auditor said there was no irregularities at the GTH. But the 
people over there couldn’t accept it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Privacy Commissioner is saying 
something different, and they’re saying, oh, well we support the 
privacy . . . [inaudible] . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, my question to 
them is, which independent officer are they going to support 
and which one are they going to reject and throw under the bus? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will comply with the law on this side of the 
House. We will make sure that the government agencies and 
Crowns support the things that they should support. And, Mr. 
Speaker, there is a process. There is a process that recognizes 
commercial sensitivity. There’s a process that recognizes the 
support and the right of taxpayers to know information, and 
we’ll work through that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, journalists and members of the 
public have a right to know what their government is doing with 
their money. Access to information isn’t something government 
only has to provide when it’s convenient. It’s the law. No one 
should have to go to court to get access to documents about the 
GTH, especially after the independent Information and Privacy 
Commissioner has already said there’s no reason these 
documents can’t be released. 
 
The Minister of Justice keeps going back occasionally to 
commercially sensitive information, but the commissioner has 
already said, “I find that neither GTH nor Brightenview has 
demonstrated to my office that there are objective grounds for 
believing there is a reasonable expectation of harm if the 
information was disclosed.” 
 
Will the minister listen to what the commissioner has to say and 
release the records, or is he really going to force the people of 
this province to sue the GTH in the Court of Queen’s Bench? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, so far as I know, the 
provisions to go to the Court of Queen’s Bench have never been 
used in our province. We’ve sorted things out through the 
services of the Office of the Privacy Commissioner. The 
recommendations that are made by the Privacy Commissioner 
are something that can and should be taken very seriously by 
this government and by everybody that’s in government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the GTH intends to respond to the Information 
and Privacy Commissioner before the one-month deadline, 
which is May 27th, Mr. Speaker. Once the GTH formally 
responds to both the Privacy Commissioner and the applicant, 
they can advise them of their intention, and there’s a period, a 
waiting period, before records can be released so that they have 



May 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4313 

the opportunity to appeal or go to the Court of Queen’s Bench. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no laws have been broken. The laws have been 
complied with. We’ve offered assistance from the Ministry of 
Justice to make sure that they’re able to do it in a timely, 
professional, and competent manner. The GTH takes the 
obligation seriously. Officials within the GTH have been 
working closely with the Privacy Commissioner and they will 
consult with their legal experts as they go forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Access to Deputy Ministers 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister of the 
Environment stated the following: 
 

So I would say to the Leader of the Opposition, his 
question is probably not well placed to the Premier, who 
was the then minister. The question is better placed to the 
deputy ministers of Environment and Agriculture, and if he 
would like to place that question to them, because they 
made that decision, we could help facilitate that any time. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the hypocrisy runs deep. Of course we know 
that the buck stops with the ministers and with the Premier. But 
if they’re insisting that we talk to the deputy ministers, I’m 
going to ask again. Will the Sask Party government invite 
Laurie Pushor to come testify about the land scandal at the 
GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I appreciate having the opportunity to address this, Mr. 
Speaker, the question from the member opposite as well as a 
follow-up on some things that were said by the Leader of the 
Opposition just yesterday in the House, Mr. Speaker. The 
Leader of the Opposition asked questions yesterday in the 
House asking of the minister — the Premier, then the minister 
at the time — in terms of who requested the deputy minister to 
the Premier attend those meetings, that meeting in June, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it odd that in four hours of estimates last 
night, including an hour with the president of the Water 
Security Agency and three hours with the deputy minister of the 
Environment, that not once did that member ask a question, that 
not once did the Environment critic ask the question, and not 
once did the Leader of the Opposition pop down into room 8 to 
ask the deputy ministers or the president what their interaction 
is with the deputy minister to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s odd that they would ask the question when the deputy 
ministers aren’t in the House to answer the question, but when 
they have an opportunity over four hours to ask the question, 
nobody bothers to show up. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Again all we get from this government is no answer 
and no commitment to the questions that are put to them. The 
Sask Party government has refused time and time again to let 
Laurie Pushor out of the witness protection program. And even 
though they parade out one deputy minister after another for 
Corrections and Policing, all the media ever gets is the deputy 
minister in Corrections and Policing. 
 
So why is it that for this one deputy minister, Laurie Pushor, the 
Sask Party government refuses to let him answer questions? Is 
it simply because he was the deputy minister at the heart of the 
GTH land scandal? If they are offering up meetings with DMs 
[deputy minister], why won’t they, for once and all, free Laurie 
Pushor and arrange a meeting with him before the session ends? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 
relationship between ministers and deputy ministers, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to quote: 
 

. . . as a minister, I would expect the deputy to run the 
department well in an administrative sense, to take full part 
in collegial management with his or her fellow deputy 
ministers and other senior public servants, to consult me on 
policy matters, and to give me ample warning of 
impending problems. 

 
Mr. Speaker, no short of an authority than Allan Blakeney in 
terms of the relationship between a minister and a deputy 
minister relationship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this matter I’ll just say this, and I can’t believe 
I’m saying this but I’ll give credit to Cam Broten. Because at 
least when he was the Leader of the Opposition he’d come in 
and ask the hard questions in the House and then he’d follow up 
in committee, Mr. Speaker. Unlike this Leader of the 
Opposition that asked these questions in the House yesterday 
about who was requesting what meeting with the deputy 
minister and a minister, and when he’s got four hours to ask a 
president of a Water Security Agency and the deputy minister 
of Environment ministers, like so many issues on this front, like 
so many issues of leadership, he’s a no-show. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Management of Global Transportation Hub 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the lists, the long lists of 
unanswered questions continues to pile up and someone should 
answer for it, Mr. Speaker. In 2014 . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — In 2014 the Ministry of Highways entered an 
agreement to pay nearly $3 million upfront to the GTH for earth 
from the infamous east parcels to be used at the Regina Bypass. 
The money flowed, but as we learned in committee this week, 
four years later the land hasn’t been used for anything at all. 



4314 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2018 

This government claims that the GTH will be paying this 
money back but couldn’t provide a timeline saying, “The funds 
will be recovered as they sell the land or as they develop the 
land.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, looking at that dismal land tucked in beside 
the bypass and the abysmal selling record of the GTH, this 
doesn’t seem a likely prospect anytime soon. Saskatchewan 
people have sunk enough money into this failed project. Will 
the minister order the GTH to make this payment immediately 
and now, before the GTH is shut down? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
answered the question. She asked when it would be paid for. 
The answer was simple: when the land gets sold. Nothing any 
more complicated than that. Mr. Speaker, the GTH is trying to 
sell land. When they sell land, money flows, money moves. It’s 
on the books. It’s money that’s payable to the Ministry of 
Highways. It’s all taxpayers’ entity, taxpayers’ dollars in any 
event, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, it shows we’re going to 
try and sell some land and do it. 
 
What I would encourage the members opposite to do is go back 
to the GTH and spend some more time out there. They might 
want to go to Emterra. Emterra has invested $21 million. It’s 
Regina’s curbside recycler. They take paper, plastics, metals, 
glass. They collect them. They sort them. They bundle them. 
They also have got a very culturally diverse workplace. Over 
half of the people that work there are women. They’ve been 
recognized as one of Canada’s greenest employers for three 
years in row. Mr. Speaker, they should be supporting that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — It’s funny the minister doesn’t quote from the 
long list of businesses who were going to settle at the GTH and 
didn’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was Brad Wall, the members opposite’s former 
leader, that said on this specific issue that if government 
acquires land and doesn’t need it, “we could quite rightly be 
accused of not using taxpayers’ money wisely.” Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the Saskatchewan taxpayers have footed the bill for 
this land that has sat idle ever since. We shouldn’t have to hope 
and pray that the GTH can somehow recover and make the 
taxpayers whole. We’ve already footed the $150 million to put 
the GTH together. 
 
With new costs relating to the GTH trickling out all the time 
and key witnesses still being blocked, it’s clear we aren’t 
getting the full picture. Will the government commit to 
reconvening a special committee to finally fully canvass this 
issue? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the GTH is a long-term 
project, multi-generational facility that will create jobs and 
create economic prosperity in the city of Regina. We’re glad to 
have it. We’re glad it’s been there. The advertising that the 

members opposite are doing in the Chamber is not helping sell 
land, having that kind of question going on, but it’s certainly 
their right to do it. 
 
We’ll be reminding voters of that when the bypass is complete, 
when there’s more jobs out there, and when more projects come 
in, that they were not ones that were supporting it. We will be 
reminding people that they were the ones that were opposing 
the things that were there. We’re going to remind them of that 
when the election time comes. 
 
We’ll also remind the 1,800 people that worked there during 
construction. We’ve got $485 million in private investment 
there now, nearly 1,000 full-time jobs that are taking place out 
there right now, Mr. Speaker, and those members should be 
getting behind it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Funding for Emissions Reduction Initiatives 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
morning the government announced that they’ll be applying to 
the Low Carbon Economy Fund, despite being told that we 
wouldn’t qualify. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these look like promising projects and it 
doesn’t hurt to try, but the minister himself said he has received 
no indication from the federal government that they would even 
be considered. And if the funding hinges on a real plan being 
developed in Saskatchewan, well, Mr. Speaker, we have a 
reason to be worried. Our emissions are said to increase each 
year until 2020, and while long-term projections show these 
emissions eventually coming down, the Sask Party government 
has no plans to get there. 
 
How does it make any sense to leave Saskatchewan people 
vulnerable to the whims of the federal government? And does 
the minister have any assurances from the federal government? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, certainly we’ve put forward a plan that does include a 
40 per cent reduction in GHG [greenhouse gas] emissions by 
the way of our electrical generation in this province by 2030; a 
40-45 per cent reduction in methane emissions, Mr. Speaker, as 
a part of a plan here in the province rather than allowing the 
federal government very prescriptive methane regulations that 
we think will be harmful for the economy. 
 
I think the member opposite knows, and we talked about it in 
estimates last night, that we will be rolling out performance 
standards on a sector-by-sector basis over the coming months, 
Mr. Speaker, and we’ll be able to tell the public and the federal 
government what the emissions reductions will be on those, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I certainly would hope that the member opposite would 
support our position — not only on these projects that would 
see 188 million tonnes of emissions over their lifetime being 
reduced from being emitted to the atmosphere, Mr. Speaker, but 
also this notion that we somehow have to sign the pan-Canadian 



May 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4315 

agreement, which we disagree with, in order to get the money. 
Because we have examples across this country where provinces 
can disagree with the federal government and still get 
infrastructure dollars. Saskatchewan should be no different. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — 188 million tonnes. Mr. Speaker, their prairie 
resilience plan is a wish list full of TBDs [to be determined]. 
And SaskPower’s renewable fleet is growing at a snail’s pace, 
with little progress being made on the procurement of wind and 
solar projects. And now the first glimmer of a plan unveiled by 
the minister this morning may fall flat because the Sask Party 
government has simply mishandled the file. 
 
[14:15] 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, these projects do have merit. For example, 
we have been calling for measures to make energy efficiency 
homes more affordable. And to extend SaskEnergy’s natural 
gas networks to remote and First Nations communities will both 
reduce emissions and address out-of-control heating costs. If the 
federal government denies Saskatchewan access to the fund, 
will the government commit today that these innovative and 
important initiatives will still move forward? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of 
green infrastructure envelopes that the federal government has 
announced. And certainly if projects don’t move forward 
through this round, we would certainly look to advance those 
through additional rounds in a later date, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think, getting back to the point that I think we’re trying to 
make today, and certainly we hope the members opposite share 
this position, Mr. Speaker, is Saskatchewan should not be 
denied our share of the $62 million infrastructure fund through 
this first round simply because we refuse to sign on to the 
pan-Canadian framework, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are examples across this country where provinces who 
disagree with the federal government on issues like pipelines 
still get infrastructure dollars. And obviously, Mr. Speaker, we 
have a province who has yet to sign the constitution, and yet 
they get infrastructure dollars and they get equalization. 
 
So why the federal government is choosing, Mr. Speaker, why 
the federal government is choosing to exclude Saskatchewan 
from the $62 million, we think is unfair and we certainly hope 
the members opposite would agree with our position on that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Rental Housing Supplement and Support for  
People with Disabilities 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this government continues 
to justify their heartless cut to the Saskatchewan rental housing 
supplement, suggesting that there are 3,000 Saskatchewan 
housing units that are vacant. But, Mr. Speaker, we know these 
cuts target people living with disabilities who face significant 
barriers to accessing housing that meets their needs, and that 

vacancy rates are simply a red herring. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, will the Sask Party finally do the right thing 
and simply reverse this damaging cut? And can they tell us 
exactly how many of those housing units are designed for 
people living with disabilities? And of those specialized units, 
how many are vacant? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, 
thank you for the question. And again I have to put on the 
record — I said this again yesterday in estimates, Mr. Speaker 
— this government is investing over $46 million in the 
Saskatchewan rental housing supplement. Nobody that is on 
this program will currently be changed, as long as their 
eligibility remains the same. 
 
We have seen a change in the market, Mr. Speaker. We have a 9 
per cent vacancy rate. Our rent is dropping. The document that I 
tabled with the member yesterday, Mr. Speaker, shows that the 
rent in our major city of Saskatoon has come down by $150 on 
average a month, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have to look at all of the assets that we have within our 
system, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Housing Corp also has a huge 
vacancy rate that we need to get occupied, Mr. Speaker, and we 
think that this is a prudent time to look at this program. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, let’s be clear. They’ve 
eliminated new entrance into that valuable program for people 
living on the margins, and anyone whose situation changes is 
placed at risk economically, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Canada housing benefit, which won’t even be available 
until at least 2020, was intended to provide an increase in 
housing supports. But this government has decided to use it to 
replace an existing program, simply to balance their own 
mismanaged budget. Mr. Speaker, we know that people living 
with disabilities are already facing so many barriers to find 
housing, and even more so when they’re living on income 
assistance programs. 
 
Can this government guarantee that people living with 
disabilities that are affected by these cuts will be given and 
provided a unit that meets their needs in the housing authority? 
Or will this cut result in so many more people living with 
disabilities facing homelessness? And finally, why won’t he 
simply do the right thing and reverse this damaging cut? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I guess I 
need to remind the member of who created the SAID 
[Saskatchewan assured income for disability] program for the 
disability community, Mr. Speaker. It was this side of the 
House that took care of the disability community. It was this 
side of the House that eliminated the 440 wait-list, Mr. Speaker. 
It is this side of the House that is working with the Valley View 
transition committee to be able to transition all the people out of 



4316 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2018 

Valley View into communities across . . . a home, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in this recent budget, in tough financial times, Mr. 
Speaker, we were able to invest $10.4 million in our 
community-based organizations strictly dealing with those on 
the front line, Mr. Speaker, being able to help them out with 
their wages, Mr. Speaker, because they are working with the 
most vulnerable in our community. And I’m very proud of the 
record that we have on this side of the House with the disability 
community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report 
Bill No. 91, The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of the Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 91 
and that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 91 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 91 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. Oh, sorry, I recognize . . . 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Cox: — [Inaudible] . . . Bill No. 123, The Snowmobile 
(Fees) Amendment Act, 2018 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 123 and 
that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 123 — The Snowmobile (Fees) Amendment Act, 2018 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 123 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
81, The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 
with amendment. 



May 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4317 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill and its 
amendments be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 81 with 
amendment and that this bill be now read a third time. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 81 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous)  
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I move that the amendments be now 
read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved first and second 
reading of the bill. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may move third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 81 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous)  
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 81 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
88, The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 88 and 
that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 88 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 88 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed 
by the Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill 
No. 86, The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017 
without amendment. 
 



4318 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2018 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request to 
waive consideration of the Committee of the Whole on this bill 
and that this bill now be read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 86 and 
that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 86 — The Child and Family Services  
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — I move that this bill now be read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 86 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 124, The 
Environmental Management and Protection (Environmental 
Handling Charges) Amendment Act, 2018 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill now be 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 124 and 
that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 124 — The Environmental Management and 
Protection (Environmental Handling Charges)  

Amendment Act, 2018 
 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — I move that the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 124 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, so the committees may 
continue their good work this afternoon, I move that this House 
do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved to 
adjourn the Assembly. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This Assembly stands adjourned until 10 a.m. 
tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:28.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Hindley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4307 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4307 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4307 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4307 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4307 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4308 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4308 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4308 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4308 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4308 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatoon Hosts Cinergie Festival 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4309 
 Beginning of Ramadan 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4309 
 Sexual Assault Awareness Week 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4309 
 Royal United Services Institute Victory Ball 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4310 
 Melfort Archery Champions Hit the Mark 
  Goudy ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4310 
 Senior Girls’ Basketball Team Takes Silver 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4310 
 Business Is a Staple in Prince Albert Community 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4311 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Donations to Political Parties 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4311 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4311 
 Release of Information on Global Transportation Hub 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4312 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4312 
 Access to Deputy Ministers 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4313 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4313 
 Management of Global Transportation Hub 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4313 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4314 
 Funding for Emissions Reduction Initiatives 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4314 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4314 
 Rental Housing Supplement and Support for People with Disabilities 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4315 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4315 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4316 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4317 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4318 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 91 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4316 
 Bill No. 123 — The Snowmobile (Fees) Amendment Act, 2018 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4316 
 Bill No. 81 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4317 
 Bill No. 88 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4317 



 

 Bill No. 86 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4318 
 Bill No. 124 — The Environmental Management and Protection  
 (Environmental Handling Charges) Amendment Act, 2018 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4318 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 81 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4317 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


