


















































March 21, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 32A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 21, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3535 
 March 21, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you to all members of this House, I would like 
to take the opportunity to welcome back to this House the 
former member and MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] from Wood River, is Yogi Huyghebaert has joined 
us here today. And, Mr. Speaker, he served for a number of 
years, served that constituency, set it up in extremely good 
shape so that we were actually able to get the current member 
elected in the last election — our now Minister of Highways, 
Mr. Speaker.  
 
But I most notably remember the opportunities that I had to 
work with Yogi in his time as minister of Public Safety but also 
minister, Mr. Speaker, of the provincial disaster file and some 
of the roads and whatnot that we were fixing up in our area. 
And the yeoman’s amount of work, I would put forward, that he 
put into that file is appreciated. And on behalf of the province, 
we’re very thankful for his effort on that file in particular, but 
his service in general. And I ask all members of this House to 
welcome Yogi to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Premier in welcoming the former member from Wood 
River, Mr. Yogi Huyghebaert, back to his Legislative 
Assembly. I know Yogi and I had the opportunity to do some 
CPA [Commonwealth Parliamentary Association] work several 
years ago, Mr. Speaker. And I know that we didn’t have a lot of 
points of commonality in our discussions but we sure did, I 
think, enjoy each other’s company at the end of the day, Mr. 
Speaker, and both are well committed to the well-being of this 
province.  
 
I thoroughly enjoyed getting to know Mr. Huyghebaert. I know 
often relationships can be tenuous between the sides, Mr. 
Speaker, but that was one of the values of CPA, was getting to 
know members who we don’t have the time to connect. So with 
that, I’d like to ask all members to welcome Mr. Huyghebaert to 
his Legislative Assembly. And it’s very good to see him today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yogi’s 
getting a lot of accolades today because I also, to you and 
through you, would like to introduce Yogi now. As everybody 
around here knows, Yogi and I used to do a lot of cooking 
together and we got to be very good friends. And he actually 
comes fishing with me every summer. Well let’s put it this way, 
Mr. Speaker. I do the fishing; Yogi does the cooking. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the reason Yogi’s in here tonight is I’ve 

asked our three newest members over to my condo tonight. I 
was going to cook for them and give them a meal. And Yogi 
said, “You won’t be able to handle that.” And he said, “You’ll 
have to have expert help to help you and feed them properly.” 
So Yogi’s coming over to my place also to show me what to do. 
So I want to ask all the members to please welcome Yogi to his 
Legislative Building. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to welcome guests 
seated in the east gallery. Please welcome to the Legislative 
Assembly, we have with us today Neil McDonald; Neil’s 
parents; Brit McDonald; and Neil and Brit’s young daughter. 
We also have with us Katie Emde. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these folks are with us today to share some of 
their concerns around the lack of supports for children with 
special needs in this province. And I will be asking questions 
later, but at this point I’d like to welcome these advocates to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to this Assembly, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
some guests on the floor of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, from 
the Canadian National Institute for the Blind. Mr. Speaker, the 
CNIB works tirelessly to help enhance the lives with people 
living with vision loss. They had an event at the legislature on 
Monday for members on both sides of the House. They’re 
having an event tonight to celebrate the 100th anniversary of 
CNIB, Mr. Speaker, and as part of that they’re joining us here 
today. 
 
I’d like to introduce our honoured guests: John Mulka is 
CNIB’s regional vice-president in Western Canada; Christall 
Beaudry is the executive director of the Saskatchewan division; 
Luc and Rita Lemoine and their daughter, Emilie who is a 
CNIB client; Ashley Nemeth, a CNIB client and her guide dog, 
Rick; and also Michael Shaw who is a CNIB client. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I again thank them for the event that they hosted 
for us on Monday. We hope their event tonight goes very well, 
and I’d ask all members to please join me in welcoming them to 
their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the minister opposite in welcoming the guests from 
the CNIB today. A hundred years is a long time of advocacy for 
those who are partially sighted or blind, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
commend them for the work they do on making sure people 
have the confidence, the skills, and the opportunity to lead full 
and robust lives. So thank you for all the work that you do. 
 
I’m sorry that I wasn’t able to attend your reception on 
Monday, but I always appreciate the opportunity to connect and 
the visits that you pay us on a regular basis. So thank you for all 
the work that you do. On behalf of the official opposition, I’d 



3536 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2018 

like to ask all members to welcome these guests today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to join with my colleague, the Minister of 
Health and the Health critic from across the aisle, to welcome 
the better half of our family, actually my sibling group, my 
sister Christall and the work that she does with the CNIB. It’s 
their 100th celebration tonight and many of us will be attending 
that. And I just want to thank you for all your hard work. 
 
I also see Darla and Mary in the gallery today. And I’d also like 
to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
with the member from Regina Lakeview in welcoming the 
McDonald family to their Legislative Assembly. Neil and Brit 
McDonald live in Regina Douglas Park, but not only that, 
Neil’s business shares a wall and is neighbours with my 
constituency office. 
 
Neil is the owner of Hunter Gatherer Vegetarian Diner, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a wonderful community gathering spot. It may be 
the, I dare say, the restaurant with the most exciting, the most 
interesting decor in the city. And even if you’re not a 
vegetarian, Mr. Speaker, I strongly encourage you to check out 
the restaurant. They have the best fries in the city. And it’s truly 
a family affair. I often see Neil’s father, who’s here today, 
working alongside his son in the diner, as well as Neil’s partner, 
Brit, who is an amazing artist in her own right. She works at the 
diner, but she also helps do some artistic work for the diner and 
is also using her artistic capabilities in advancing a better 
understanding of how we as a society can better assist children 
who live with autism. 
 
So I’d like to join the member from Regina Lakeview and ask 
all members of this Assembly to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to 
introduce someone in your gallery. Mary Donlevy-Konkin is 
here. She’s no stranger to members of this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, having served in this building from 2007 to about 
2015, and most recently, Mr. Speaker, as my chief of staff when 
I was the Minister of Justice and the Attorney General. Mr. 
Speaker, I must say that I am forever grateful for all the support 
that she gave me in my role and learning my role as the 
Attorney General over those number of years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
She had the good sense to leave me though, Mr. Speaker, and 
now she is . . . She’s now practising law in the city of Saskatoon 
at the McKercher firm, Mr. Speaker. She continues with her 
legal practice and some significant work, Mr. Speaker, in 
charitable organizations in Saskatoon and some board work, 
Mr. Speaker. So I would ask all members of the Assembly to 
welcome Mary back to her Assembly. 

While I’m on my feet, sitting next to Mary is Darla Lindbjerg 
who is the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Saskatoon 
Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Speaker. The chambers around this 
province, Mr. Speaker — and Saskatoon is no exception — 
provide some great advice to us, Mr. Speaker. They’re great 
advocates for the business communities, in the communities 
where they are, Mr. Speaker. And so I want to especially 
welcome Darla to her legislature, Mr. Speaker, and thank her 
chamber and all chambers around Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
for the incredibly hard work that they do. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 
to join with the Deputy Premier to certainly welcome Mary to 
her Assembly, and we wish her well. 
 
But it is a great honour to welcome Darla Lindbjerg to her 
Assembly and to offer thanks for her leadership within the 
Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce. I had the privilege to 
recently sit down with Darla and greatly appreciated that 
conversation. I’m thankful for the work of her members and I’m 
also thankful for her leadership in bringing Michelle Obama to 
Saskatchewan tomorrow. And I look forward as one — I’m sure 
many others — that will be joining her tomorrow in Saskatoon. 
So thank you, Darla, for your leadership. Thank you for 
working to build a bright future for all within our province. 
 
While on my feet I’m also really proud to welcome Shannon 
Berard-Gardiner to her Assembly, a long-time friend, somebody 
that I’ve learned an awful lot from. Shannon is an inspiring 
person who’s worked for change within social services and 
within our province, together with her partner, Chris, and 
together with Matthew. And Matthew’s an inspiring young 
person living with a disability who is living a high quality of 
life because of Shannon and Chris. 
 
I had the privilege to know this family for quite some time. I 
know my dad was also, I think, principal in two different 
schools to this family, and so we’ve gotten to know Matthew 
awfully well. I had the privilege recently to come across 
Matthew and Shannon over at the Royal Saskatchewan 
Museum and had a great visit, and that sparkle in Matthew’s 
eye is always something that leaves me in a good spot. So I 
thank and welcome Shannon to her Assembly as well. 
 
And just 10 more introductions, Mr. Speaker. Next I’d like to, 
while on my feet, recognize Ashley Nemeth, who’s here today. 
A leader within our province, someone who’s worked tirelessly 
to advocate for those that are visually impaired and someone 
who lives a full life with a full family, and someone that I 
admire and someone that I was really proud to also count as a 
teammate in the last provincial election as she stepped up to 
serve as the candidate in Indian Head-Milestone. Thank you for 
Ashley’s many efforts and I welcome her to her Assembly here 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I also have visitors here that I’d like to 
introduce. Sitting in the Speaker’s gallery, my gallery, is my 
mother, Margaret Docherty, and my cousin, Dan Neeson. Dan’s 
visiting from Buffalo, New York. And they’re a couple of 
people that love to sit and watch the proceedings on the 
legislative channel. Amazing. 



March 21, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3537 

But I truly welcome both of you here and thanks so much for all 
of your support. Thanks for, you know, number one, coming to 
my office and just saying hi. But I appreciate both of you 
immensely, and again I’d like to have all members welcome my 
mom and my cousin to this Assembly. 
 
I recognize the member from Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker, for following after you. 
I know that’s not normally protocol, so thank you for 
recognizing me. I want to just join with the members opposite 
in recognizing Ashley Nemeth from Indian Head who’s 
obviously from my constituency. And also Gunnar Passmore 
who’s sitting behind me who’s, I believe, he’s still living . . . 
No, he used to live in Sedley for many, many years and many, 
many elections. 
 
I can honestly say this is the first time that I’ve welcomed two 
constituents to the Legislative Assembly and I know neither one 
voted for me. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you for that. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont 
. . . oh, sorry. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You snooze, Mr. Speaker, right? To 
you, you know, and through you, I rise to present petitions on 
behalf of concerned citizens that are concerned with the 
underfunding and the cuts to post-secondary education by the 
Sask Party. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned citizens of 
Moose Jaw. I so submit. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I was first. I am 
pleased to rise today to present a petition from the citizens who 
are opposed to the federal government’s decision to impose a 
carbon tax on the province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Porcupine 
Plain, Bjorkdale, and Watson. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition calling on the government to stop the 
cuts to our children’s classrooms. Those who have signed this 
petition today wish to draw our attention to the following: to the 
fact that this government took in an additional $67 million in 
education property tax, but cut $54 million from our children’s 
classrooms. 
 
Even though the Sask Party is making us all pay more, our 
children are actually getting less. And as might be expected, 
Mr. Speaker, these cuts have had devastating impact on 
classrooms and school divisions around the province, including 
cuts to high-needs and special-needs preschools right here in the 
city of Regina. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and stop making 
families, teachers, and everyone who works to support our 
education pay the price for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
once again to present a petition calling on the Sask Party 
government to appoint a seniors’ advocate. The petitioners 
point out that the concerns of Saskatchewan seniors have not 
been a priority of the Sask Party government. They point at cuts 
that this government has made that have directly impacted the 
lives of seniors, like the cuts to the podiatry program, the 
hearing aid program, the cuts to STC [Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company], increasing long-term care rents; 
many, many places, Mr. Speaker, where . . . increasing 
medication costs. There are many places where this government 
has hurt seniors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The petitioners point out that the province of Saskatchewan 
doesn’t have legislated minimum care standards for long-term 
care, and even with continued reports, including one from last 
month — their own report, Mr. Speaker, their CEO report. Even 
with these continued reports and concerns from families on the 
issues in long-term care, the Sask Party government has failed 
to ensure safety, qualify of life, and dignity for seniors. They 
point out that several provinces have seniors’ advocates and 
they successfully work to ensure seniors have the supports they 
need and deserve. And a seniors’ advocate would provide vital 
support for seniors and their families across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to immediately appoint a seniors’ 
advocate to ensure the rights of seniors are upheld and that 
all seniors across the province have the supports they need 
and deserve. 

 
This petition today is signed by citizens from Saskatoon and 
Regina, Mr. Speaker. I so submit. 



3538 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2018 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Beck: — I request leave to revert to introductions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Okay. The member from Regina Lakeview 
has requested leave for an introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t want to let the 
opportunity to introduce three special guests, who are seated in 
your gallery, get by me today, Mr. Speaker. Seated in your 
gallery are Sandra Mountford, Anita Burkell, and Marty Bley. 
These directors of child care centres in Saskatoon have come to 
their Assembly today and to advocate on behalf of their centres. 
They belong to the Saskatoon Federation of Early Learning, 
whose mission it is to advance the profession of early learning, 
Mr. Speaker, and that is indeed a worthwhile and important 
mission. And I would invite all members here to welcome these 
three early educators to their Legislative Assembly. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination 

 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to bring 
attention to the United Nations International Day for the 
Elimination of Racial Discrimination, which is observed today, 
on March 21st. The International Day for the Elimination of 
Racial Discrimination was established six years after the 1960 
Sharpeville massacre in which police in Sharpeville, South 
Africa opened fire on peaceful protestors who demonstrated 
against the apartheid pass laws. Tragically, 69 protestors were 
killed that day, and since then the United Nations has called on 
the global community to remember the negative and oftentimes 
fatal consequences of racial discrimination. 
 
The theme of this year’s day International Day for the 
Elimination of Racial Discrimination is Promoting Tolerance, 
Inclusion, Unity, and Respect for Diversity in the context of 
combatting racial discrimination. This year’s theme is very 
relevant to us here in Saskatchewan as we work toward building 
reconciliation through unity and respect for our indigenous 
peoples. Let us celebrate the diversity of our province and work 
towards a more inclusive society. 
 
I ask that all members join me today in observing the 
International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 
and urge the government to take meaningful action on the 
issues of racial discrimination and racial violence. Further, may 
we always remember our province’s motto: “from many 
peoples, strength.” Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar-Sask 

Valley. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, March 21st, 
marks the International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination. Over the past 52 years this day has been 
recognized to commemorate past and present efforts to end 
racism and racial discrimination and to mark how far we have 
come, while recognizing we still have further to go. 
 
This year’s theme is Promoting Tolerance, Inclusion, Unity, and 
Respect for Diversity in the context of combatting racial 
discrimination. This day encourages each and every one of us to 
see what we can do every day to stand up against racism and 
intolerance. Diversity is what makes our society strong, 
bringing our communities closer together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 2018 marks another significant milestone. Seventy 
years ago this December the UN [United Nations] Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights was adopted. Forty-eight 
countries voted for this declaration, including Canada. As a 
society we can acknowledge the progress that has been made 
since this document was signed but, as Martin Luther King Jr. 
said, “Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere.” We 
must continue to push for tolerance and equality across all our 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I challenge all members of this Assembly, as 
representatives of our constituents, to lead by example as we 
continue to work towards the elimination of racism from our 
province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 

 
Lafleche Named Hockeyville Finalist 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to rise in the 
House today and recognize my hometown of Lafleche. Lafleche 
— which is south of Gravelbourg and east of Assiniboia, in 
case you’re wondering — became one of the four finalists for 
Kraft Hockeyville during Saturday’s Hockey Night in Canada 
broadcast. 
 
Last Saturday hundreds of people crammed into the Lafleche 
Community Centre to see if they had been selected as finalists. 
Now the journey started in January, when Gillian de Graauw 
and her team of organizers behind the Hockeyville bid began 
submitting stories and rallying the town around the cause. As 
Gillian pointed out in her contest submission, “. . . hockey in 
Lafleche is not just a game. It is a family, a community striving 
to better the lives of those around us.” 
 
Now I can attest to that, Mr. Speaker. I have so many fond 
memories of watching my four brothers play hockey in that 
rink, from bantam to midget, and then of course to our beloved 
senior men’s team, the Lafleche Flyers. We even had our own 
NHL; it was the Notekeu Hockey League. And our guys 
brought home the championship on many occasions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the final round of voting opens at 10 a.m. on 
March 30th and closes at 6 p.m. on March 31st. And the winner 
will receive $250,000 in arena upgrades and the title of Kraft 
Hockeyville, as well as the opportunity to host an NHL — and 



March 21, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3539 

that’s the National Hockey League — pre-season game. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t get to do this very often in 
campaigns, but I encourage all members and all the people of 
Saskatchewan to vote, and to vote often, for my hometown of 
Lafleche and their push to win Kraft Hockeyville. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

Canadian National Institute for the Blind  
Celebrates 100th Anniversary 

 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The CNIB is 
celebrating its 100th anniversary. This is a great opportunity to 
express our gratitude to the CNIB staff, board members, and 
volunteers for their excellent work that they do for the 
Saskatchewan people experiencing vision loss. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian National Institute for the Blind has 
successfully undertaken the role as the sole provider of vision 
rehabilitation services in Saskatchewan since 1918. The CNIB 
provides rehabilitation services and support, research, 
advocacy, and public education for people with loss of sight. 
 
Our government is committed to working with the Canadian 
National Institute for the Blind to ensure vision rehabilitation 
services are available to partially sighted individuals in 
Saskatchewan. Since 2013-14, the Ministry of Health has 
provided over $2.4 million in funding to the CNIB for vision 
rehabilitation services and low-vision aids. Last year our 
government delivered on a promise to invest an additional 
$250,000 to support vision loss rehabilitation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating 
the CNIB on reaching their 100th anniversary milestone, and 
we extend best wishes to the next century of services providing 
community-based support, knowledge, and voice to ensure all 
Canadians who are blind or partially sighted have the 
opportunities to fully participate in life. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

World Down Syndrome Day 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is World 
Down Syndrome Day. As a proud parent with a daughter with 
Down syndrome, I appreciate the efforts to raise awareness and 
to create a single, global voice for advocating for the rights, 
inclusion, and well-being of people with Down syndrome. 
 
World Down Syndrome Day was first observed in 2006 in 
many countries across the world, and in 2011 the United 
Nations General Assembly declared March 21st as World 
Down Syndrome Day. 
 
To help bring awareness, Down Syndrome International began 
the Lots of Socks campaign. This campaign encourages 
everyone to wear the official Lots of Socks or to wear any 
mismatched socks. They can be bright-coloured socks, printed 
socks, or even socks of different lengths. They also encourage 
people to use the hashtag #LotsofSocks and the hashtag 

#WDSD18 across all social media platforms to bring awareness 
through a large online presence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the Down Syndrome 
International society, the Canadian Down Syndrome Society, 
and the Saskatchewan Down Syndrome Society for all the work 
that they do to raise awareness about this condition and how the 
people with Down syndrome hold a very special place in our 
lives and communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Royal University Hospital Foundation Radiothon 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to stand 
to recognize the Royal University Hospital Foundation for its 
efforts to raise funds for one of our province’s busiest hospitals. 
Thanks to the many successful fundraising events and generous 
donors over the past 35 years, the RUH [Royal University 
Hospital] Foundation has invested more than $115 million in 
innovative research, education, and patient care. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the foundation is now in its final stretch of its 
three-year, $20 million campaign in support of emergency, 
trauma, and critical care needs. Today the foundation is hosting 
a radiothon in support of the GREATE.R. campaign at the 
Royal University Hospital in Saskatoon, with the goal of raising 
$200,000 in just 12 hours. Mr. Speaker, this money will go 
towards purchasing equipment and furnishings for RUH’s new 
adult emergency department currently under construction and 
set to open in 2019. Our government is committed to ensuring 
patients receive high-quality, timely healthcare in a modern 
environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I 
commend the RUH Foundation and its donors for their efforts 
and generosity in raising funds for this very important project. 
We wish the RUH Foundation the best of luck today in their 
radiothon as we are confident that they will reach their 
fundraising goals. I encourage everyone to make a donation 
today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

Saskatchewan’s 22nd Lieutenant Governor 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today we had 
the privilege of swearing in Saskatchewan’s 22nd Lieutenant 
Governor, His Honour the Honourable W. Thomas Molloy. 
 
His Honour was born and raised in Saskatoon, received a 
Bachelor of Law from the University of Saskatchewan, and 
practised primarily in the areas of indigenous and business law. 
He was involved in a number of treaty negotiations in his 
career, but none were as impactful as his role as chief negotiator 
for the Government of Canada in negotiations with the Inuit of 
Nunavut in the Nunavut Land Claims Agreement. This led to 
the creation of the territory of Nunavut. 
 
From 2001-2007, His Honour served as a chancellor of the 



3540 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2018 

University of Saskatchewan. In 1996, His Honour was 
appointed an Officer of the Order of Canada, and in 2012 he 
was invested into the Saskatchewan Order of Merit, among 
many other honours and awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to recognize former Lieutenant 
Governor, the Honourable Vaughn Solomon Schofield who 
held the position with grace and honour since her appointment 
in 2012. She has served this province laudably. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this Assembly, I want to thank the 
Honourable Vaughn Solomon Schofield for all her remarkable 
work, and welcome His Honour the Honourable W. Thomas 
Molloy, Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Management of Provincial Economy 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, it was a historic day here in the 
House and a great celebration. But across the province, there are 
families who are struggling and life is becoming less affordable 
every day. Nearly a thousand families have their mortgage 
payments in arrears — a 40 per cent increase in just five years, 
three times the national average. 
 
Saskatchewan families are struggling, Mr. Speaker, and this 
government’s last budget only made that harder. A budget that 
cut key services in health, in education all while increasing 
costs through the addition of PST [provincial sales tax] to 
construction, to restaurant meals, to children’s clothing. These 
measures further slow a sluggish economy and delay our 
recovery. 
 
With these alarming numbers on mortgages in front of us, Mr. 
Speaker, what measures will this government take this year to 
make sure that Saskatchewan people are not facing the prospect 
of having to walk away from their homes? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and I thank the member opposite for the question. There are 
some challenges in the last number of months in our province, 
Mr. Speaker, with the downturn in natural resource prices, some 
of our mining industry, some of our energy industry, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But thank goodness for our agriculture industry, Mr. Speaker, 
that remains strong here in the province of Saskatchewan. And I 
think it’s important for us to identify the diverse nature that our 
economy is made up here in this province, Mr. Speaker, as it’s 
those exports that are our source points of wealth, Mr. Speaker, 
that allow us to invest in the very services and infrastructure 
and invest in our communities across this province, Mr. 
Speaker. And in doing so, we can continue to invest in the 
families and the people of this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have had a downturn in the last number of 
months, but we will continue, Mr. Speaker, to push forward to 

ensure that we can bring things back to balance in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, so that we can sustain that very investment that 
the people in this province have come to expect over the last 
decade, so far into the future, for my children and their 
children’s children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We lost 7,800 jobs in 
this province in the last year, compared to an increase of 46,000 
jobs in Alberta. A large portion of those jobs lost were in 
agriculture, which you mentioned as one of the strengths. 
 
We need a bit more than that sort of cheerleading about our 
economy. We need some real plans. We need some real plans 
about how are we going to deal with a problem we see growing, 
that growing problem of families having their mortgage 
payments in arrears — triple the national average. How is this 
government going to take real measures, not these austerity 
measures that slow down our economy, but real measures to 
stimulate the economy, not stifle it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, we have had the opportunity to 
invest across the province over the last decade. We’ve had a 
decade of a strong economy here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and it’s allowed us to invest in 
physicians, allowed us to invest in medical infrastructure and 
education infrastructure. It’s allowed us to invest in education, 
in the people in the classroom, Mr. Speaker, most notably with 
another seven and a half million dollars just recently, Mr. 
Speaker, to top up the last quarter, to add some educational 
assistants to our classrooms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in doing this, we’ve been able to remove 112,000 
people from the tax rolls here in the province. Some of our most 
needy people in the province, Mr. Speaker, have been totally 
removed from the provincial tax roll. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we all know and we recognize as well that it 
isn’t the government that drives the economy, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
always those industries that operate within our province, Mr. 
Speaker. We have a few of those industries that are challenged 
right now getting their product to market. Most notably, our rail 
system is plugged up a little bit, Mr. Speaker. And one way for 
us to ensure that we can correct that into the future is to 
advocate on behalf of safe, efficient pipelines, Mr. Speaker, in 
their construction. 
 
I see our neighbours to the west of us, the Opposition Leader 
and the Premier have joined in their support of advocating on 
behalf of the Kinder Morgan pipeline, Mr. Speaker, and I ask 
the Opposition Leader to join with the Premier of Saskatchewan 
today to advocate on behalf of that for our farmers, our energy 
industry in Western Canada, and a strong economy here in the 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Legal Counsel and Federal Carbon Pricing 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, it would be lovely to see this 



March 21, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3541 

government be effective in their advocacy with the federal 
government. Unfortunately, whether it’s the case of the 
pipelines or getting our grain on trains, on so many issues, we 
see this government outsmarted by Trudeau, not successful in 
their advocacy. 
 
Last week, Mr. Speaker, last week our Justice critic submitted a 
written question to the Minister of Justice and the Attorney 
General asking whether this government has sought legal 
counsel regarding its fight with Ottawa, and if so, how much 
was paid and what recommendations were offered. Instead of a 
response, Mr. Speaker — and I found this very shocking — we 
received a refusal to provide this information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, answering the questions of the opposition is 
essential. It’s a fundamental in a parliamentary democracy. So 
I’ll ask the questions again here out loud. Has this government 
sought legal counsel on the merit of their lawsuit? If so, what 
was the cost of that opinion, and what was the advice that was 
received? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — I’ll tell you what’s shocking, Mr. Speaker. 
What’s shocking is the members opposite are already waving a 
white flag, already asking Prime Minister Trudeau to tax the 
industries and the families in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And I am unsure as to why that would be outside of 
when, Mr. Speaker, when we tallied up the members opposite’s 
platform, Mr. Speaker, there’s two and a half billion dollars that 
needs to be filled, Mr. Speaker. It includes some economic 
development programs in agriculture that the Minister of 
Agriculture will be speaking to at some point in time. 
 
But what the people of the province want to know, Mr. Speaker, 
what the people in western Canada want to know . . . In the 
province of Alberta, the Leader of the Opposition and the 
Premier have joined together in their advocacy of the Trans 
Mountain pipeline, Mr. Speaker. And I’m asking the members 
opposite and the Leader of the Opposition to join with the 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan to advocate on behalf 
of the industries that ensure that we have a strong economy in 
this province into the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, this government has been roundly 
criticized, roundly criticized for its lack of transparency in the 
past, and it’s disappointing to see that pattern continue under 
the new management, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In contrast, the government of Manitoba has provided a very 
clear answer to the very questions that I just asked and got no 
answer to. Mr. Speaker, they sought an opinion from legal 
scholar Bryan Schwartz, and they paid $40,000 for that opinion 
and received very clear advice that, to quote Premier Pallister: 
“If we just say ‘no,’ we get Trudeau. If we go to court, we lose 
. . . We develop our made-in-Manitoba plan and we put it out 
there.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government appears to be stubbornly running 
headlong into a futile course of action. Instead of coming up 
with a made-in-Saskatchewan solution that could improve the 

lives of people right here. Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve to know. They deserve to know. Is this 
government about to embark on a costly crusade, a pointless 
crusade? 
 
So I’ll ask the question one more time. Did this government 
seek a legal opinion? What did that opinion say, and how much 
did it cost? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I cannot believe, I cannot believe the Leader of the 
Opposition, it’s his position that we should, in terms of 
consulting legal counsel with respect to the position of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, that we should outsource that to 
the province of Manitoba. I cannot believe that that is the 
stand . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Member from Athabasca, could you please 
come to order. Member from Athabasca, could I have your 
attention, please. Can you come to order? Yes or no? 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Yes.  
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I cannot believe that the Leader of the Opposition 
would advocate a position that we outsource legal advice to 
another province. I can’t believe that that would be the case — 
that one province, they undertake some legal review, and that 
that should be the answer for the rest of us and we should just 
settle for that. That’s not how we operate on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the member opposite talked about a costly endeavour. I’ll 
tell you what’s a costly endeavour, Mr. Speaker. First and 
foremost, a $2.5 billion annual increase to the expenses of this 
province that the Leader of the Opposition is advocating for. 
Two and a half billion dollars each and every year in increase. 
And how would he pay for that? I think it would have to be 
through a carbon tax, Mr. Speaker. Now he’s advocated for a 
carbon tax in the past. And you know what two and a half 
billion dollars looks like for a carbon tax? $100 a tonne. Not 10, 
not 50 like the Prime Minister’s talking about. $100 a tonne. Is 
that what he’s advocating for? Is he advocating for a 
23-cent-a-litre increase to the gas tax? I can’t believe he is. 
Let’s hear an answer from him. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Support for Special Needs in Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party voted unanimously 
for the Sask Party cuts to education that have had a devastating 
impact on Saskatchewan students and families. For the years 
since she was diagnosed with autism, three-year-old Ru 
McDonald’s family has been fighting to get her into school. 
Their doctor recommended that she go to school so that she can 
thrive. But because of provincial cuts, three preschool 



3542 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2018 

programs, including one designed to support children just like 
Ru, were cut. 
 
Ru’s family is joining us today in the gallery. Just this 
afternoon, Ru’s parents received word that a spot has been 
found for Ru, and that’s great news for Ru and for her family. 
But will the minister commit to reversing the heartless cuts so 
that other families don’t have to fight so hard and so long to get 
their children into school? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the family here 
today to bring their concerns to the floor of the legislature. Mr. 
Speaker, I understand the needs for intensive supports for 
children in the classroom, especially with respect to autism, Mr. 
Speaker. I have a granddaughter that’s autistic, Mr. Speaker, 
who is in need of intensive needs within the classroom as well. 
So I know the challenges of parents, and I know the challenges 
of grandparents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I can tell you this, Mr. Speaker: the plan of this government 
is to move to individualized funding for children with autism, 
Mr. Speaker, and our plan is to move that plan forward. There’s 
certainly a lot more work to do, but I can tell you that $281 
million this year to school divisions in supports for learning 
funding, Mr. Speaker, and just last week, Mr. Speaker, $41 
million which was announced by the federal government to help 
early learning, Mr. Speaker — of that, 220 preschool spaces 
will be made available for children who need intensive 
supports, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly there is work being done in the Ministry of Health, 
Mr. Speaker. There’s more work to be done, Mr. Speaker, but I 
think the commitment that’s been made by the federal 
government in terms of increased funding, the commitment that 
the Premier has spoken about in terms of seven and a half 
million dollars, Mr. Speaker, for classroom supports, mid-year 
funding annualizing to $30 million, Mr. Speaker, is a good step 
forward. Certainly more work to do, Mr. Speaker, but we’ll 
continue to work to ensure that the supports that are required for 
children with autism and other intensive needs continue to be 
met in our school systems. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I will concur with 
the minister on this: there’s much more to be done. And I know 
that the families who are in the gallery here today watching, and 
those watching at home, also know that there is so much more 
to be done. Ru’s mother, Brittany, is fighting for her daughter, 
but she’s also fighting for all Saskatchewan children who aren’t 
receiving the supports that they need. 
 
Brittany’s calls aren’t complicated. They include: infant 
screening for autism at 12- or 18-month checkups; providing 
the full recommended amount of time with educational 
assistants for every child starting in pre-K [pre-kindergarten]; 
reinstating targeted and appropriately resourced preschools to 
support high-needs learners; and adequate access to both speech 
pathologists and occupational therapists in the school system. 

Mr. Speaker, will the Education minister take Ru’s mom’s 
recommendations seriously, and will he commit to reversing the 
cuts and properly — please — properly supporting children and 
young adults in our education system? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
get the recommendations that have been brought forward by 
this family, Mr. Speaker, and I undertake to have a consultation 
with my officials within the Ministry of Education, Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to those. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, I think this government has shown a 
commitment with respect to increased funding and supports in 
the classroom with the seven and a half million dollars that we 
. . . the mid-year funding that came forward just a month ago, 
Mr. Speaker; the additional $41 million that’s come from the 
federal government. 
 
And I agree there is more work to be done, Mr. Speaker. But I 
think it can be said this government is clear in terms of its 
commitment to make sure that we meet the needs of children, 
not just early learning and children with intensive supports, in 
need of intensive supports, but all children in our school 
system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the 
frustrating thing is this is a government that makes 
commitments and kicks them down the road, Mr. Speaker. 
During the last election, the Sask Party promised to finally 
catch up to other provinces and offer individualized funding for 
children living with autism spectrum disorder. Mr. Speaker, 
they broke that promise. 
 
Almost two years later, families are still waiting for the support 
while the Sask Party continues to cut supports in schools and 
access to speech pathologists and occupational therapists. These 
families have been left to struggle and suffer. Even after we 
questioned the Sask Party in the fall session, they still refused to 
act. Will the minister finally come through, make good on the 
promise, and fund individualized supports for children with 
autism now and not make them wait any longer? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
the Deputy Premier and Minister of Education just eloquently 
stated just a few minutes ago, we are going to move forward 
with individualized funding. It was deferred last year at budget 
time to this coming year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s $4,000 a year per child under six. The 
platform was we were going to grow that to $8,000 in 
subsequent years and then with more long-term goals of 
increased funding, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, start dates, 
that type of thing, more details will be unveiled at budget time. 
But rest assured, Mr. Speaker, we will be following through 
with that promise. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



March 21, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3543 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Management of Global Transportation Hub 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, while they abandon our kids, 
they’re still spending money hand over fist at the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub]. The numbers don’t lie. Over $200 million 
spent so far and over $37 million, and growing, in debt. $13 
million on land acquisitions and another $11 million on lawsuit 
settlements on those land acquisitions. Mr. Speaker, $21 million 
on the land at the centre of the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] investigation and possible charges, and almost 
$10 million just to move a power line. 
 
Tens of millions of dollars from Crowns, ministries, agencies, 
but the GTH’s debt continues to grow and grow and grow. With 
tens of millions of their dollars thrown away, Saskatchewan 
people have more than paid the price for straight answers. So is 
this government hoping to sell or give away the GTH? And if 
not, what is their plan to fix the financial mess at the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in any real estate 
development the first costs that have to be paid for are the costs 
of acquiring the land, the costs of subdivision, the costs of 
putting in roads, the costs of putting in utilities. In this case it’s 
even more complex because you had to deal with roads, rail, 
and other access points. Mr. Speaker, those were expensive 
things to put in. Those things are now under way or completed. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the members opposite, 
because of the work that was done at the GTH, the Loblaw 
centre is open, operating, and in that centre, Mr. Speaker, there 
are nearly a thousand jobs. At the time of construction, Mr. 
Speaker, there was 1,800 jobs there. There was $485 million in 
private investments, over 860 full-time jobs. Every week, 4,800 
trucks move in and out of the GTH. Of the 1,800 acres that 
compromise the GTH, over 700 acres have already been sold. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s more work to do at the GTH because, Mr. 
Speaker, in the last couple of years the economy has slowed 
down, market conditions are not as good as they once were. 
But, Mr. Speaker, the people there are continuing to work on it, 
and we’re continuing to hold their feet to the fire, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, at a thousand jobs at $200 
million, that’s $200,000 a job for the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. I think we need to take a look at that math. 
 
Now just a couple of days ago the Attorney General, who’s also 
responsible for the GTH, said it’s too early to look into the 
Economy minister’s proposal to sell off the whole thing. While 
he was dipping his toes briefly in the leadership race, he said 
this about the GTH: “. . . there were very, very serious mistakes 
made that should never have happened.” Now, Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t often agree with the member from Meadow Lake, but he 
did get a lot right during that particular press conference. 

Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has put a fire sale on just about 
everything else, from SaskTel to STC to 660 government 
buildings and even the cafeteria here. So can the minister tell 
us, yes or no, has the government held any meetings about 
selling or giving away the GTH? Perhaps maybe over the past 
weekend at a hotel in Regina? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, last weekend I was in 
Saskatoon, so I don’t know what went on at hotels in Regina. 
And for that matter, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what went on in 
the hotels in Saskatoon. I was at home. I was visiting with 
constituents. I was in the constituency office. Mr. Speaker, I 
was doing a turkey fundraiser, and we sell turkeys to raise 
money for my constituency. And, Mr. Speaker, when I was 
delivering those turkeys I thought, wonder how the NDP are 
doing. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I can say this: the Provincial Auditor 
reviewed the work that was done at the GTH. She made a 
number of recommendations and, Mr. Speaker, the 
recommendations were very clear that we had to do a better job 
of assembling land. We had to do a better job with subdivisions. 
The recommendations were received and they were acted upon, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re not going to take advice from the members opposite. We 
appreciate the situation the GTH is in and we’ll continue to 
work to make sure the Global Transportation Hub is something 
that we can be proud of in Regina, that will continue to thrive, 
and find and create jobs. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Well I appreciate the minister’s sharing of his 
weekend activities with us, Mr. Speaker. Obviously he hasn’t 
answered the question. The question is: yes or no, did members 
of the government have meetings about selling or giving away 
the GTH this past weekend? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we don’t have any 
meetings to talk about giving away the GTH or giving away 
anything else right now. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
want to give away some advice. We’ll listen to what they’ve got 
to say.  
 
I didn’t talk to other MLAs on the weekend, Mr. Speaker. I 
went to events in Saskatoon. I went to a Hindu dinner; some of 
the members opposite were there. I did similar things to what 
everybody else did. I didn’t have any meetings on the weekend 
about GTH.  
 
Simple answer: I didn’t have any meetings about the GTH. I 
don’t think anybody else did either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 



3544 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2018 

Ownership of Crown Corporations 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, last summer after months of 
protest, petitions, and public outcry, Brad Wall took to 
Facebook and announced that he had finally seen the light and 
that he was going to repeal the Sask Party’s privatization law, 
Bill 40. Except he didn’t. Their partial repeal law, Bill 99, is 
still being debated in the Assembly and hasn’t yet come into 
force. As it’s written, Bill 99 stops the Sask Party from selling 
up to 49 per cent of one of our Crown corporations, but it still 
leaves the door wide open for a wind-down, just like they did 
with STC. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who is to say when another Sask Party minister 
will stumble onto something under their responsibility that 
they’ll want to sell off? Does the minister responsible for 
SaskTel want to try his hand at the auctioneer’s gavel? Why 
won’t the Premier commit to scrapping all of Bill 40 and take 
further sell-offs and wind-downs off the table? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we heard what the citizens 
of our province asked for. They had concerns about our core 
utilities and wanted to make sure that public ownership was 
maintained in them. They didn’t want to have discussions at 
that point in time about selling 5, 10, or 30 per cent. It was a 
sound idea to include a definition in the Act. But, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re always willing to admit that we’re willing to look at, to 
revisit something, so we’re repealing that section of the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the time we were doing that, we were in the 
process of winding up STC. And as such, Mr. Speaker, we have 
to leave that section in the Act. Mr. Speaker, if the members 
want it gone at some point in the future, we’re prepared to have 
that discussion. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Effects of Taxes on Provincial Economy 
 
Ms. Mowat: — The Sask Party’s PST hike from the last budget 
is continuing to do damage to our economy and kill jobs. 
Today’s figures from Stats Canada show that less money is 
being invested in new housing construction. New housing 
investment is down 7.6 per cent, while investment in Alberta is 
up 14.7 per cent; in BC [British Columbia] it’s up 14.8 per cent; 
and in Manitoba it’s up 18.1 per cent. 
 
Other provinces are creating jobs while Saskatchewan people 
can’t find work because of the Sask Party’s damaging decision 
to add PST to restaurant meals and the construction industry. 
When will the Sask Party scrap their job-killing tax on 
construction labour? And while they were reversing parts of 
their PST hike, why did they refuse to help Saskatchewan 
families by removing PST from kids’ clothes and home 
insurance? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade and Export 
Development. 
 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will tell 
you what the economy does not need right now, Mr. Speaker. 
And what the economy does not need right now is a massive 
new carbon tax like that being advocated by the members 
opposite. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, it takes a lot to shock me in question 
period here. I’ve been around for a little while. I was actually 
shocked by what I heard from the Leader of the Opposition. 
The Leader of the Opposition stood in his place and called our 
fight against the carbon tax a pointless crusade. Mr. Speaker, I 
think that 75 to 80 per cent of the population of this province 
believe that this is a fight worth having, that believe that a 
carbon tax foisted upon us by Justin Trudeau will not do 
anything to advance our economic interest. 
 
But what are we seeing, Mr. Speaker? Weak leadership. We’re 
seeing weak leadership and a weak position from the Leader of 
the Opposition. His position: surrender to Justin Trudeau. His 
position: wave the white flag. Mr. Speaker, that’s weak 
leadership. On this side of the House, our strong Premier is 
taking a strong position. We are going to fight Justin Trudeau 
and we are going to fight this carbon tax. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs  
and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice to report Bill No. 108, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 
2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I recognize leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and this 
bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 108, The 
Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 without amendment and that 
the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 108 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 



March 21, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3545 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 108 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs  
and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 109, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2), a 
bilingual bill, without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and this 
bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bills, Bill No. 109, 
and that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 109 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017  
(No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2017 modifiant le droit législatif 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 109 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — Order. I can’t hear. Well I’m happy to name 
people; I mean, whatever. I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs  
and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
to report Bill No. 74, The Evidence Amendment Act, 2017, a 
bilingual bill without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration of 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and the bill be now read 
the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 74, The 
Evidence Amendment Act, 2017, a bilingual bill without 
amendment and that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 74 — The Evidence Amendment Act, 2017 
Loi modificative de 2017 sur la preuve 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 74 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 



3546 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2018 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs  
and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
to report Bill No. 96, The Choice of Court Agreements (Hague 
Convention Implementation) Act, a bilingual bill without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that this bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 96 and 
that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 96 — The Choice of Court Agreements  
(Hague Convention Implementation) Act 

Loi sur les accords d’élection de for (mise en œuvre  
de la Convention de La Haye) 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that this bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 96 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. During question 
period today, the Minister of Environment mentioned 

something around a document he has that stipulated something 
around $2.5 billion. I can’t totally tell what he’s saying, but if 
the minister could table that document that’d be greatly 
appreciated. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. What we 
were referring to was the Leader of the Opposition’s promises 
from the leadership race. I know the Leader of the Opposition 
hasn’t compiled all of these promises in one place or costed 
them, but we’ve done that for them, Mr. Speaker, as it adds up 
to $2.5 billion. I have the list right here. I’m happy to table it. 
Maybe the members opposite can take a look at it. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 170 through 174. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered the 
answers to questions 170 to 174. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 121 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 121 — The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’ll try to 
get this out of the way off the top. I’ll not go on at such a great 
length that I’ll need to stop for snacks or anything like that 
along the way, but certainly a lot of anticipation on Bill No. 
121, The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act. 
 
I hear my colleague from Martensville very excited about this 
speech, very excited about this legislation. I’m not sure what 
that’s about, but okay. Everybody’s got their loves; everybody’s 
got their likes, Mr. Speaker. So you know, if she wants to get 
excited about Bill No. 121, fair ball. Fair ball, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But certainly this one was . . . a lot of anticipation on this one. I 
think, where are we clocking on this one, dead last? Dead last 
of all the provinces in terms of a cannabis control framework, 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of jurisdictions throughout the country. 
 
Now I’m getting some static from Moosomin, by way of 
Wolseley, or the other way around. I’m not sure if the bridge is 
swinging or what’s going on over there. But anyway, Mr. 



March 21, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3547 

Speaker, I don’t know if he’s applying, is he applying for a 
grass station over there, or what’s going on? Is he looking for 
. . . open up his own shop? I don’t know, maybe that’s 
Whitewood. Pardon me, that’s probably Whitewood. Probably 
Whitewood. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, in terms of The Cannabis Control 
(Saskatchewan) Act — long awaited, hotly anticipated. And in 
terms of again being a bit of a study in terms of the differing 
positions over there, I know I’m sure my colleague, the 
Government House Leader, had a lot of insightful thoughts on 
this one. You know, the guy’s interested in public policy, that’s 
for sure. And I think I can see some of his fingerprints on this 
legislation but maybe not in bold relief or anything. 
 
But anyway, Mr. Speaker, all levity aside, it is good to finally 
see this piece of legislation come forward. It’s good to see that 
the government’s finally, you know, clocked in at dead last in 
terms of bringing in the appropriate provincial regulatory 
regime, this of course being snuck up on them by the federal 
Liberal election win in 2015; you know, years ago now, Mr. 
Speaker. And you know, this is what they’ve come up with. 
And maybe it’s . . . Parts of it, sort of like the three bears or, 
you know, Goldilocks, Mr. Speaker, in terms of some of it. You 
know, a little cold and some of it a little warm; some of it just 
right, I’m sure. 
 
But in terms of the age, they’ve stated that to be people under 
the age of 19 prohibited from possessing or consuming 
cannabis, punishable by a fine of up to $2,000. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s a variety of opinions on that side in terms of, 
be it, you know, 25 as the age. And of course if you’re going to 
try and drive the black market out of this, Mr. Speaker, that 
would have been a non-starter in terms of that gap between 19 
and 25. So frankly for myself, Mr. Speaker, glad to see that they 
settled on the age of 19. 
 
There’s still some legitimate medical questions to be answered 
or concerns to be addressed, Mr. Speaker. And in terms of the 
kind of educational campaigns and the kind of dangers that are 
inherent if you’re smoking marijuana or ingesting marijuana, 
and for people that are still developing their prefrontal cortex, 
Mr. Speaker, and some of the potential risks that entails, there’s 
a job of education to be done there for sure, Mr. Speaker. But in 
terms of the various things that we try to accomplish under 
public health education campaigns, Mr. Speaker, that would 
certainly be one for that sphere. 
 
In terms of consuming cannabis in public spaces being 
prohibited, again there was a good bit of commentary provided 
on the public record by a columnist, Murray Mandryk, a close 
observer of the comings and goings in this place, Mr. Speaker, 
in terms of, if you’re going to be outlawing the consumption of 
cannabis in public spaces, what is the attendant enforcement 
regime that goes along with that? And what are the costs that 
are going to be entailed therein, Mr. Speaker? That’s a question 
that needs an answer. 
 
In terms of the amount, whereby under the legislation, 
possession of more than 30 grams and more than four plants 
being prohibited, again, Mr. Speaker, it’s a . . . Not to tip my 
hand too much here, Mr. Speaker, but I’ve got a better 
understanding of what a 12-case of beer looks like in terms of 

my possessions, Mr. Speaker, than I do what 30 grams would 
amount to or four plants. But certainly four plants would seem 
to be consistent with the federal regime or with other 
jurisdictions, although again there are exceptions to that, 
notably in Quebec where they went kind of to the extreme of no 
plants at home. Again, Mr. Speaker, sort of odd, but anyway 
that one would seem to be just right in terms of Goldilocks and 
the three bears. 
 
Now this one, again it’s my understanding that this has parallels 
in the liquor control legislation, but whereby possession of 
cannabis in a vehicle is prohibited, except when transporting it 
from the place it was obtained to the place it will be consumed. 
Again, Mr. Speaker, there was an interesting exchange on the 
rotunda when this legislation was introduced, with the Minister 
of Justice talking about, musing upon grass stations and going 
back and forth. Again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of law being 
enforceable or not enforceable, Mr. Speaker, this one as well 
begs the question or a number of questions. 
 
And then lastly the legislation sets out various of the rules for 
retail stores selling cannabis. Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
interesting to note the evolution of this whole topic, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of just the economic impacts on the province, 
the health impacts on the province, and again the fact that 
Saskatchewan comes last in terms of introducing what the 
regulatory framework is going to be compared to other 
jurisdictions. 
 
It raises a number of questions around what kind of an 
economic disadvantage that places potential producers at in the 
province of Saskatchewan, the kind of economic development 
opportunities that are there in this new field of consumption and 
production, Mr. Speaker. And perhaps that’s something that can 
be further explored in the committee stage of the legislation, 
Mr. Speaker, but these are questions that remain. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And this is perhaps not so much a matter for the cannabis 
control Act debate, but certainly the whole question of, the 
questions of enforcement generally as regards what constitutes 
impairment and how you’re going to have a valid test for that, 
Mr. Speaker. There is other legislation before this Assembly 
where there’s a couple of questions that arise from that as well, 
but I have yet to be informed of what is a good enforcement 
regime around accurately establishing impairment as regards 
the use of marijuana. But if you’re going to put in legislation 
where there are any number of sanctions that can be deployed in 
a person’s life on the basis of a less-than-appropriate or accurate 
test, that would seem to be a prime candidate for bad 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll, of course, have more 
questions about that. 
 
There’s also the questions that arise in terms of what this does 
to promote, you know . . . Again, I’m a city kid, born and raised 
in the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker, but certainly my father grew 
up on the farm out Montmartre way. My mother was an import 
from a farm out in rural Ontario. But, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
the tremendous agriculture sector that we have in Saskatchewan 
and that continual drive, that continual search for value-added, 
for diversification in the ag sector, Mr. Speaker, this would 
seem to be a market that would be tailor-made for those kind of 



3548 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2018 

concerns, Mr. Speaker. And that again we’re so far behind other 
jurisdictions in terms of what the framework was and what is 
possible for producers, Mr. Speaker, is again . . . It’s a 
government being less than helpful in terms of that economic 
development pursuit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I guess as well there’s some questions that we have as regards 
the wholesale and retail aspects of this legislation, Mr. Speaker, 
in terms of not availing ourselves of the wholesale and 
distribution possibilities that exist under SLGA [Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority]. We’re interested as well in 
terms of, you know, will this legislation effectively result in the 
market being captured by large out-of-province interests, both 
on the production side and the wholesale side? Or is there some 
kind of benefit that will accrue to Saskatchewan people in this 
market? 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I note with great interest other 
jurisdictions that have ensured that there will be co-operation 
and involvement of First Nations in both the production, 
distribution, and retail sides of this whole endeavour. And you 
know, it bears further examination certainly, Mr. Speaker, but 
the early sort of commentary from different of the leadership 
amongst First Nations would seem to indicate there wasn’t the 
job that needed to be done in terms of ensuring that 
involvement, ensuring that engagement, Mr. Speaker, by the 
Government of Saskatchewan with First Nations, on the 
possibilities that exist under this new field of production and 
commerce. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other points that 
I’m sure my colleagues will canvass more thoughtfully and 
fully than I. But for the time being, I am prepared to move 
adjournment on the debate of Bill No. 121, The Cannabis 
Control (Saskatchewan) Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 121, The Cannabis 
Control (Saskatchewan) Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 122 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 122 — The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2018/Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi 
intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s always 
great to join the debate, and certainly when the debate is of 
great consequence, as this is the case certainly with 
consequential amendments to The Cannabis Control 
(Saskatchewan) Act, 2018. Or as they might say in French, 
corrélative de la loi intitulée. And I’d look to the member from 

Cannington for better instruction on la langue française, comme 
ça. [Translation: on the French language like that.] But peut-être 
un jour en francais, monsieur le Président. [Translation: Maybe 
one day in French, Mr. Speaker.] 
 
But certainly consequential amendments, of course, for those 
folks following at home, are those that are required by changes 
in main legislation that cascade through other pieces of 
legislation. And of course the main mover, the main impact, 
comes in Bill No. 121, and then these consequential 
amendments flow through on Bill No. 122. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve said my piece as regards this 
topic generally under my intervention for Bill No. 121. And 
with that I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 122, The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments 
Act, 2018. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 122, The Cannabis 
Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2018. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 72 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 72 — The 
Privacy Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise this afternoon and add my two cents into the debate for Bill 
No. 72, The Privacy Amendment Act. A few of my colleagues 
have already had the opportunity to speak to this bill. I don’t 
have much to add to their wise words but I will add a few, and 
I’ll leave it to you to decide whether or not mine are also wise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill introduces additional options for an 
individual who has had intimate images of themselves shared 
with others without consent. This was referenced in the fall 
2017 Speech from the Throne and has been winding its way 
through the legislative process ever since, Mr. Speaker. I know 
my colleague, the member from Saskatoon Centre, when he was 
speaking to this bill, provided quite a bit of historical 
information and discussion around privacy and the importance 
of privacy and how that interplays with this particular piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. It’s a very important step forward in 
terms of ensuring that we’re able to protect our privacy in a new 
way. 
 
There’s already some criminal provisions regarding distributing 
intimate images without the consent of the individual who is in 
the photo, but this one will allow a victim to pursue a civil 
claim, a civil action, Mr. Speaker, which is under our provincial 
jurisdiction. It’s an important addition to what’s already in 
place in terms of a criminal provision. It allows for another 
layer of action against an individual who is a perpetrator in this 



March 21, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3549 

type of circumstance, Mr. Speaker. And it also allows for the 
potential for the victim to receive some sort of a financial 
recourse. 
 
Also when you’re talking about a civil claim, the burden of 
proof is much lower than it is in a criminal claim. So 
potentially, if someone is found not guilty, not legally guilty 
pursuant to a criminal action, that doesn’t necessarily preclude 
them from pursuing this new civil action, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One interesting thing about this bill, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s a 
reverse onus. That’s usually quite rare, and it’s also unique for 
this particular type of action. I believe . . . And I don’t have my 
research in front of me. I think when I was looking into this bill, 
I think we might be the only jurisdiction that has this reverse 
onus in a bill like this. But it will allow the individual to . . . It 
requires the accused to establish that they were given 
permission and consent to produce the image rather than 
placing that onus on the victim, Mr. Speaker. When I did my 
consultations with respect to this bill — and I’m interested to 
hear from the ministry officials what their consultations were 
and what they heard with respect to this bill — this reverse onus 
was welcomed by those that I had spoken to. I’m interested to 
hear if there are folks who have any concerns about that reverse 
onus, but I have yet to hear any, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with that, I will have some questions for the committee — 
for the minister at committee rather — and as such I am 
prepared to move Bill No. 72, The Privacy Amendment Act to 
committee. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 72, The Privacy Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 72, The Privacy 
Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to the Standing Committee 
on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 75 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 75 — The 
Electronic Communications Convention Implementation 
Act/Loi de mise en œuvre de la Convention sur les 

communications électroniques be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise this afternoon to add to the debate around Bill No. 75, The 
Electronic Communications Convention Implementation Act. 
Mr. Speaker, this bill moves to make the United Nations 
Convention on the Use of Electronic Communications in 
International Contracts law in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the 
convention that I just spoke of was adopted by the United 
Nations committee on international trade law back in 2005. And 
its purpose was to clarify some rules respecting electronic 
formation of contracts for international parties, if those parties 
desire to use it. 
 
So it’s designed to facilitate an extra level of ease in 
international business, and it’s an opt-in sort of provision. No 
one is obligated to use it if they do not wish to use it, but 
passing this bill into law in Saskatchewan would allow those 
businesses to use it should they choose, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I will have a few questions with respect to this bill at 
committee. Otherwise, I look forward to having the opportunity 
to ask those questions to the minister. So as such, I’m ready to 
move Bill No. 75, The Electronic Communications Convention 
Implementation Act, to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 75, the electronic communications 
implementation Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 75, the electronic 
communications implementation Act, 2017 be committed to the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 87 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 87 — The Data 
Matching Agreements Act be now read a second time.] 
 
[15:00] 
 



3550 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2018 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise and provide some further debate on Bill No. 87, The Data 
Matching Agreements Act. Mr. Speaker, I look forward to 
having the opportunity to ask the minister some questions at 
committee. 
 
I’m hopeful, Mr. Speaker, as I know, as being the critic of 
Justice, for Justice there are quite a few bills that end up being 
Justice bills, so they end up being the bills that I talk to at 
committee. But there are some great, hard-working committee 
members on the government side as well, and I look forward to 
the member from Kindersley, one of the new MLAs, to ask 
some hard-hitting questions on, in particular, Bill No. 87, The 
Data Matching Agreements Act when this bill comes to 
committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m not sure if he knew that that was part of the rule that when a 
new MLA is sworn in, that his job is to be the individual on the 
government side who asks questions about legislation in 
committee, but I’m looking forward to hearing his thoughts, in 
particular on this bill. But there’s plenty of other Justice bills 
that I know it’ll give him the opportunity to cut his teeth at the 
always exciting and always wonderful IAJ [Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice] committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 87, The Data Matching Agreements Act, 
talks about some very large pieces of information and some 
expectations for security. It allows for the act of using some 
software to track and analyze large amounts of data, and this 
Act outlines how that would happen and some efforts to ensure 
that privacy and good practice occurs. 
 
This bill further outlines how an organization would ask for this 
information, expectations of security, and that they also have to 
destroy the data within two years. Mr. Speaker, the 
organizations participating, that wish to participate, also have to 
provide a report to the government access coordinator, and 
individuals would also be able to request information collected. 
And then these government coordinators will also be legislated 
to provide information regarding this process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill also provides for a fine for an amount not 
more than $50,000 for any individuals who contravene this Act, 
Mr. Speaker. When we’re talking about access to information, 
we’re talking about sharing of information. And I was speaking 
just about a different bill, but that bill dealt with privacy. We’re 
talking a lot about access to information and privacy as well, 
Mr. Speaker. There’s a lot of questions and there’s a lot of 
concerns that we need to ensure are addressed when we’re 
talking about these two issues and when the government is 
involved, and particularly this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m looking forward to asking some questions of the minister, 
like I had said, about this bill at committee. As I have already 
said, I encourage, I look forward to seeing my fellow committee 
members at committee again and looking forward to hearing 
their questions as well. As such I am prepared to move Bill No. 
87, The Data Matching Agreements Act, to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion of the minister that Bill No. 87, The Data Matching 
Agreements Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 87, The Data 
Matching Agreements Act, 2017 be committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 92 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 92 — The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again, 
good to join debate this afternoon, and this one’s a relatively 
short piece of legislation with a lot of impact, Mr. Speaker. And 
certainly members opposite will be interested to know that this 
one involves a half a billion dollars in terms of import for this 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I don’t know if it was the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy drafted this one up and then left it on the doorstep for 
the new Minister for SaskTel, in terms of raising the debt limit 
for . . . He’s casting his mind back. He’s thinking about it. I 
don’t know if I’m going to get any letters from him later today 
about this but anyway, we’ll see how that goes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I was going back over committee from spring of 2017, Mr. 
Speaker, and it was kind of painful. It was kind of painful. It 
brought up a lot of painful memories for me, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of the plans for this government on the part of our Crown 
corporations. 
 
And I guess the one thing I appreciate about this particular 
piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, is that it’s crystal clear that 
they’re looking to raise the debt limit for SaskTel from $1.3 
billion to $1.8 billion. And you know, and I guess I’ll be 
interested to see how it comes in terms of getting answers to the 
questions for that. 
 
Certainly we’d had some questions about that during the annual 
report briefing from the officials at SaskTel, and we always 



March 21, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3551 

appreciate that, Mr. Speaker. And in terms of it being since 
1991 — that that was the last time they’d raised the debt limit 
for SaskTel — and that there’s a requirement for that greater 
flexibility that debt limit allows, you know, relatively 
straightforward things to figure out. 
 
But it’s also interesting to figure out how that relates in turn to 
things like the wage mandate that again is a bit of a moving 
target on the part of this government as regards how they’re 
going to wring that out of, in this case, SaskTel’s employees, 
Mr. Speaker. What that amounts to, you know, and it’s also . . . 
And I see I’ve caught the interest of the Finance minister now. 
Of course, what was the quote on the Public Service 
Commission, Mr. Speaker, from the Minister of Finance? I 
think it was, “I don’t care what they say. It’s just so much blah, 
blah, blah,” I think is what the Finance minister once had to say 
about the Public Service Commission. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, you know, it’s one thing for that 
minister to think that about the Public Service Commission and 
the public servants that are along for the ride, that are subject to 
the decisions that she and her colleagues make, Mr. Speaker. 
But there are real-life employees out there that are very 
interested to know if they’re going to have a job or if this 
government is going to persist in selling off 49 per cent of their 
corporation or if they’re going to use the debt limit to squeeze 
out dividends to keep the crapshoot of finances floating over 
there, Mr. Speaker. You know, those men and women are very 
interested in all these questions and here we’ve got like half a 
billion dollars of reasons why these are all important questions. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we’re certainly going to have a lot of 
questions for this one in committee. I look forward to, you 
know, what the new minister has to say there. You know, 
maybe they’ll bring the Finance minister along so she can 
explain how the mandate’s going to impact those men and 
women, Mr. Speaker, what dollars are going to be taken out of 
those hard-working employees’ pockets, Mr. Speaker, what the 
rationale is for applying it equally across the public service and 
the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, you know, public service 
entities compared to commercial entities. You know, the mind 
sort of staggers in terms of all the questions that this action 
raises on the part of this government. So again, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s something that we’ll look forward to, you know, I’m sure 
what’s going to be an interesting debate at committee. But for 
the time being, Mr. Speaker, I’d invite my colleague across the 
way to move this bill to committee so that we might have that 
more fulsome discussion. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 92, The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 92, The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, be 
committed to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 93 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 93 — The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again this 
one is sort of a variation on the consequential amendment 
theme in terms of a need arising with the debt limit to address 
the attendant changes in The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act. 
 
Again all the same concerns attach to this as well, Mr. Speaker, 
in terms of raising that debt limit from $1.3 billion, Mr. 
Speaker, to $1.8 billion, a half-a-billion-dollar debt limit 
increase, Mr. Speaker. And again there may be some perfectly 
valid reasons why this change is required on the part of the 
corporation, on the part of the normal functioning and best 
operations for the corporation. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s being 
brought forward by a government that again is having a 
negative impact on people’s lives to the tune of billions, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of tax increases and service cuts and fiscal 
mismanagement. 
 
Again it begs some comment, Mr. Speaker, that this change in 
debt limit is going up at this time. And I’d add parenthetically, 
Mr. Speaker, that this is alongside increases in debt limits to 
others of the commercial Crowns, Mr. Speaker, over the last 
five years in terms of what this government has done — the 
increase to the debt limits that they will allow the universities to 
carry, Mr. Speaker, the increases to the debt limits that they will 
allow municipalities to carry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again it speaks to a broader pattern on the part of this 
government where the problems, you know, they’re not about 
sort of shouldering the pain, Mr. Speaker. They’re very much 
about sharing the pain. You know, they’re very much about 
making the decisions that result in pain, Mr. Speaker. But when 
it comes to paying the price and paying the consequences, 
they’ll certainly, they’ll pass that along as fast as you can get 
through a debate on a consequential amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this case again with SaskTel, moving . . . 
increasing the debt limit by half a billion dollars . . . And again 
there’s a lot of interest in that magical word over there, 



3552 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2018 

“billion.” You’d think that they’d spend some time looking in 
the mirror, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what their own fiscal house 
looks like. But you know, maybe they’re in a glass house that’s 
a mirror, and that would serve a couple of purposes, Mr. 
Speaker, because they certainly shouldn’t be throwing stones at 
anyone, given their record, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 
finances of this province. 
 
And again we’ve got a piece of legislation here increasing the 
debt limit by half a billion dollars — from $1.3 billion to $1.8 
billion — against a backdrop where they’re going to the 
workers, the men and women who make that corporation, 
provide a great service for Saskatchewan, that’s expanding and 
needs to, that provide a good cost service to the people of 
Saskatchewan, that do it for Saskatchewan people in 
Saskatchewan. You know, they’re such a Saskatchewan 
corporation their headquarters is located at Saskatchewan Drive, 
Mr. Speaker. All of these things are taking place against a 
backdrop of they’re going after the men and women for wage 
concessions at the bargaining table. They’ve got some kind of 
convoluted, you know, gymnastics routine in terms of what is a 
mandate and what are cuts to the men and women working for 
that corporation, whether they’re going to go at it through 
attrition or what they were once referring to as Wallidays, Mr. 
Speaker, or however else that’s going to get carried out. 
 
And they’re also looking for, I’m sure, a nice dividend to keep 
the finances floating come budget time, Mr. Speaker, because if 
you can be sure of anything, you can be sure of this: this 
government is going to be looking to squeeze the Crowns like 
lemons, Mr. Speaker, to try and get the juice into their budget 
and keep things afloat over there. And again, Mr. Speaker, if 
that’s in line with a return on equity in house, matches 
alongside industry standards, that’s one thing. And if they can 
make that argument and it’s not without breaking into, you 
know, nervous laughter, we’ll see if that’s the case, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[15:15] 
 
But again this is a government that’s got a profound and 
fundamental antipathy towards the Crown sector that, you 
know, just as late as this past spring and fall, Mr. Speaker, 
where they went through the whole 49 per cent and somehow it 
doesn’t constitute privatization. You can sell off 49 per cent of 
a Crown, Mr. Speaker, and by the magic of passing a law and, 
you know, clicking your heels together three times and wishing 
hard enough, apparently, Mr. Speaker, 49 per cent sell-off 
wouldn’t constitute privatization. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, when you’re that much at odds with 
the laws of reason and rationale, Mr. Speaker, maybe it’s time 
to pack it in. And you know, that’s I think part of why the 
Premier took the long, hard look into the TV screen and said, 
yes, maybe I’ve stayed at the dance too long, Mr. Speaker; 
maybe it’s time to head on to other things. And of course passed 
it on to other folks like the member from Martensville and 
member from Weyburn-Big Muddy to soldier on, to carry 
forward. So who knows if they’re going to come forward with 
some kind of piece of magic — like 49 per cent of a sell-off, 
you know, that’s not privatization. I’d like to think that they 
wouldn’t be, they wouldn’t be up for that kind of exercise in, 
you know, oh, creative fiction, Mr. Speaker. But we’ll see 

what’s to come in the budget that’s looming ever larger. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I know that other of my colleagues will 
have things that they want to say on other bills in this debate. 
And I know I for certain have got a lot a questions as regards 
the functioning of one of our most valued Crown corporations, 
SaskTel, and its proper functioning and the great work that the 
men and women do in that corporation, Mr. Speaker. And those 
are better addressed at committee. So with that, I would invite 
my colleague opposite to do what needs be done to move this 
bill on to committee so that we might have that broader 
conversation. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the minister that Bill No. 93, the Saskatchewan 
telecommunications corporation amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 93, the 
Saskatchewan telecommunications corporation amendment Act 
be committed to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 101 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 101 — The 
Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure today 
to rise and enter into debate on Bill No. 101, The Agricultural 
Implements Amendment Act. As the title would suggest, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a bill that proposes to change an Act, The 
Agricultural Implements Act, that was last updated, I believe it 
was 14 years ago, Mr. Speaker, which . . . In the normal course 
of events in this Assembly, sometimes we see bills in front of us 
that are being updated for the first time in 70 years or 40 years. 
Fourteen years is a relatively short period of time, unless we’re 
talking about the ever-changing world of privatization and Bill 
49. 
 
But this bill, I think the minister noted in his second reading 



March 21, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3553 

comments, there’s some reason after 14 years to make some 
amendments to this bill, and the main reason there being the 
really fast-paced changes that we’re seeing in agriculture and 
the rise of the use of technology and the implications that that 
has for agricultural implements in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
And I think that there is certainly no denying that. Anyone 
who’s had the opportunity to be on a tractor recently might not 
recognize it as being the same beast as the cabinless old Massey 
that some of us might have been accustomed to back in the day, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So since this Act was last amended, of course, the advances in 
agriculture really have been staggering with regard to 
technological changes. I know I had the opportunity to meet 
with agrologists, as did a number of members on both sides of 
this Assembly, at the start of session and had a number of really 
fascinating conversations with just some of the technological 
changes that are being realized in fields all around this province 
— a specific application that’s being guided by satellite 
technology on fields, mapping, use of aggregate data to inform 
choices around inputting moisture for example, Mr. Speaker, 
and temperature to inform choices around things such as 
fertilizer application. So this is certainly not the same thing that 
we saw back in the ’90s or even in the 2000s, the early parts of 
this century, Mr. Speaker. So I do understand the need to update 
the legislation. 
 
In second reading comments the minister did note that there 
was an ongoing discussion and there was some request on the 
part of industry for this legislation, which is always a question I 
like to ask, Mr. Speaker. What is the reason that we’re seeing 
this bill in front of us? I understand that to be at least part of the 
genesis of this bill coming from producers themselves. 
 
So they pointed out, as the minister has said, that agriculture is 
evolving at an unprecedented rate and that today’s farmers need 
access to the latest, most cutting-edge equipment available. And 
I think, Mr. Speaker, as soon as you pull it off the shelf 
something new is there waiting right in its place — as some will 
understand my Simpsons . . . I think it’s The Simpsons reference 
— and that flexibility is essential if implement manufacturers 
are expected to be industry-leading innovators. And that is 
certainly something, a goal that we share on both sides of this 
House, Mr. Speaker, that ensuring that producers have access to 
the technology and support that they need to ensure that we are 
taking our rightful place in the world, being on the cutting edge 
of agriculture and technology on the planet. 
 
And I think of, you know, some of the work that goes on in the 
fields, at the universities, and boy, if we could just get that 
product to port at this point we would be a lot further ahead. So 
I look for some progress on that part as well, Mr. Speaker, 
because we can do everything we need here, but still need to 
move product to port. And hopefully we’ll be hearing some 
progress on that front, because it has cost producers billions. 
And so it really, really does need to move to a top priority to 
ensure that we are not using technology and increasing 
productivity and being innovative in the province, and then 
stagnating when it comes to actually getting that product onto 
cars and to port. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s a bit of a digression, but I think that this 
is a part of the whole piece that we see here in terms of looking 

to the future of agriculture in our province. And you will get no 
debate, as I said, from me on the importance of that industry to 
not only the current economic situation in the province but to 
our future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the other changes that are proposed in this 
legislation include doing away with the Agricultural 
Implements Compensation Fund. My understanding, Mr. 
Speaker, that that is necessitated or that’s made . . . That 
suggestion is put forth because of the move to summary 
financials, that there is no need to keep a distinct fund for those 
implement compensation payments as it no longer serves that 
purpose. 
 
Another change that I found a little bit interesting here, Mr. 
Speaker, is around the amount of time that a dealer has to make 
parts available. Currently there’s a 72-hour request, which 
remains the same, but there previously was an exception for 
Sundays. It is proposed in this bill that that Sunday exemption 
is removed, so that at any point during the week — I know that 
farmers don’t take the weekends off, particularly in seeding and 
in harvest time — that that Sunday doesn’t actually turn into an 
extra day, which I think makes good sense. 
 
One of the things though that I do point out there, that one of 
the ways that those parts did get around this province, Mr. 
Speaker, was STC. And certainly during one of the last days of 
STC, my colleague from P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote had the 
opportunity to go down to Weyburn and speak with people who 
were using the bus there and the person who ran the depot in 
Weyburn. And what we saw coming off of that bus were 
implements, parts, veterinary supplies, of course in addition to 
passengers. And those buses did run on Sundays, and I do 
remember many times my mom being sent into town to pick up 
parts from the bus. So I think that’s another piece that, yes 
we’ve gotten rid of Sundays, but hopefully we have figured out 
the ways that we are going to ensure that those parts can move 
freely and in a timely way around the province. 
 
There are also some changes, fairly significant changes as you 
might expect . . . With all of this technology comes an increased 
cost for all of these implements, so there’s some substantial 
changes to compensations for farmers under section 10. For 
example, increases penalties from 10,000 up to $50,000. The 
maximum penalty for distributors who fail to pay an amount to 
the board required by section 12 is increased from $5,000 all 
the way up to $25,000. Penalties for distributors under section 
24 increased from $5 a day all the way up to not more than 
$25,000. 
 
So those increased penalties I think, Mr. Speaker, do reflect the 
increased pressure that producers are under, but also the 
increased cost of many of these implements. And there are a 
number of reasons why we might see that. I would have some 
questions in committee, you know, how that number was 
arrived at and how many people are currently paying those 
fines. Sometimes if, you know, someone is fined because you 
have a part that’s late, that’s great, but it doesn’t get you that 
day back in the field, or those two days back in the field. 
 
So those would be some of the questions I might have of the 
minister in estimates. And I do look forward to talking with the 
minister in committee about this bill, and hopefully there’s a lot 



3554 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2018 

of points of curiosity, so just some very interesting facts about 
agriculture in the province and how that runs. So hopefully, you 
know, I’ll have some members join in from the other side of the 
table and ask some questions about it. The officials always are 
there to answer those questions, and it is a great opportunity to 
ask questions on behalf of our constituents and in our critic 
areas as well, Mr. Speaker. But with that, I think I will move to 
move Bill No. 101 to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 101, The Agricultural Implements 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 101, The 
Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to 
the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 102 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 102 — The 
Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And continuing with the 
theme, I’m going to move on to another bill that deals with sort 
of another aspect of agricultural production in the province and 
that is Bill No. 102, The Agri-Food Amendment Act, Mr. 
Speaker. This Act was introduced in November of last year by 
the minister. It notes that the current bill provides a framework 
for Saskatchewan’s 20 agri-food agencies, Mr. Speaker, so this 
Act does have a lot of impact to those agencies around the 
province. 
 
To date this Act, as noted by the minister, is a tool for growth 
and development and again is one of those Acts that is 13 years 
old. So in the life of this Assembly, not a terribly old piece of 
legislation, but again we’ve seen so much that has changed and 
continues to move rapidly. And I think it is reasonable to be 
responsive and ensure that we seek to be ahead of the curve 
with regard to the agri-food industry in the province, and 
certainly is an area for diversification and for growth within our 
province, and those 20 agencies that do so well serve those 

goals in our province. 
 
I was pleased to see that the minister noted that he had 
consulted with all 20 of the agri-food agencies as well as 
including the milk producers and the province’s two poultry 
producers. Mr. Speaker, I think that that consultation is 
important. It’s appreciated by not only those in those industries, 
but it’s important to the working of this Assembly that we 
ensure that those voices are heard, and unfortunately that 
doesn’t always happen, so I do commend the minister for those 
consultations. 
 
There were a number of areas of improvement that were 
brought forth by industry to promote the principles of 
accountability, transparency, and efficiency while also looking 
at flexibility, Mr. Speaker. And that certainly is a balance and 
something that really does make its way to homes all across this 
province, to balance the needs of industry with other goals such 
as consumer protection and food safety. 
 
So I mean that is certainly a balance to be struck and something 
that I will be asking about in committee to make sure that both 
of those needs have been considered, and not that there’s reason 
to suspect. I mean I know that producers also have a role or 
have a stake in ensuring that we have the safest food and 
agri-business system as possible. Not only those risks . . . If 
there are risks in the system, it’s not only a risk to consumers 
but it’s a risk to producers who might get painted with a brush 
that they don’t want to be painted with or something to go 
wrong. So this is very important legislation, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s important to get right. 
 
I’m just going to look down to my notes here. Some of the 
points, some of the changes in this bill . . . It adds a definition 
for business day and it allows development boards and 
marketing boards to be able to change the terms of office of the 
members of the agency at the board level rather than at the 
regulation level. So they’re able to set some of the rules for 
their own agencies, which is good to see, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And other boards in the province — I’m thinking school boards, 
for example — have had a lot of that local power taken away. 
This is an instance where we’re seeing that power being . . . 
increased powers being given to the board. So it gives me hope 
that there is room for that in other areas as well, Mr. Speaker. It 
also allows some other powers such as the number of directors 
elected to the board and the terms of those directors, which 
seems reasonable, Mr. Speaker, that those bodies be able to 
govern themselves in that way. 
 
It also gives agencies the power to develop or deliver 
traceability, animal welfare, and food safety strategies, 
programs, and initiatives, Mr. Speaker. I do have some interest 
here and I’ll be asking the minister in committee, you know, the 
decision to leave those powers at the board level rather than at a 
provincial level. Certainly that traceability and animal welfare 
and food safety strategies, as I’ve described, has implications 
right across the province and really internationally in terms of 
reputation and things like that. So we’ll be watching that with 
great interest and be asking some questions there. And maybe 
the members opposite will have some questions as well in 
committee, you know, just about these 20 agencies and what 
they do and what the future is of those agencies and the 



March 21, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3555 

agri-food business in the province. 
 
Again this is an area that holds great potential, has a good 
history in this province and holds great potential as we move 
forward as being known for the food we grow and the animals 
that we also market here in the province both as meat but also 
for genetics as well, Mr. Speaker. And I think all of this really 
provides opportunities in the future, opportunities for jobs, 
opportunity for growth, and of course that very important 
opportunity for feeding people, not only at home but around the 
world. 
 
Some other changes in this bill introduces a limit for council, 
who can serve a maximum of four consecutive terms, Mr. 
Speaker. Term limits, that’s interesting. And it adds some 
additional responsibilities to the council. It adds responsibility 
for reviewing agency minutes, board orders and regulations, 
and providing governance training to new agencies, and 
working with established agencies to ensure governance 
practices are best followed. 
 
And certainly there is appetite and opportunity on boards all 
across the province for that type of training, that type of 
support. You know, often I think it is believed or it’s perceived 
that board members is something that you go onto a board and 
you put that on your resumé. But these are important positions 
that people hold, important oversight positions. And it is 
reasonable that some of that governance training is available 
and forthcoming for them, and I think it only serves to 
strengthen the agencies and really, capacity across our province. 
The more people that we have that are able to take those roles 
on boards, really it does provide strength. 
 
That oversight function, I think that it really is an area that can 
be strengthened and I will have some questions about that as 
well, and just what type of training is being looked at there and 
if it’s just in financials or policy governance or what exactly 
that is speaking about. 
 
But I don’t want to highlight all my questions here in my 
second reading speech. I know we will have time in committee, 
and look forward to that opportunity, as I always do, to sit with 
the minister and his officials and delve a little deeper into Bill 
No. 102. But with that I will move to move this bill to 
committee. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 102, The Agri-Food Amendment 
Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 102, The 
Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 115 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 115 — The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s as 
always my honour to be able to rise in the Assembly and enter 
into the debates that have been adjourned and now we’re 
resuming them again. And in this case today we’re talking 
about some proposed changes to The Residential Tenancies Act. 
 
And as you know, Mr. Speaker, if you’ve ever been a landlord 
or a tenant, the relationship between landlord and tenant has 
been subject to all kinds of legal applications and interventions 
over the years to, as the minister indicated in his comments in 
the second reading speech, is to ensure a balance between the 
rights of the landlord and the rights of the tenant.  
 
I can only think of . . . What immediately comes to mind is a 
woman and her son, the McLeods, from Saskatoon who were 
seeking, desperately seeking help because the living situation 
they found themselves in was untenable. But because they had 
cognitive and physical disabilities, they were unable to locate 
other living arrangements. 
 
The place they lived in, I think the landlord was charging 
almost $1000 a month, and it was basically a garage with 
infestations of insects and a cement floor and negligible 
plumbing. It was really a disgusting place for these people to 
have to live. They were constantly having people knock on their 
doors demanding the rent on behalf of the landlord, and then he 
was claiming that he wasn’t getting the rent. And ultimately it 
went to the Rentalsman and he was found responsible for his 
inactions and his demands on these poor people. 
 
Ultimately, through some intervention with, on the behalf of my 
office through my CA [constituency assistant], and through the 
journalism of a Saskatoon StarPhoenix journalist, their plight 
became apparent to the public, and actually some good 
Samaritans stepped in, got them moved, got them established in 
a housing authority unit. And the frustration we had from our 
office was that even their social worker did not seem to have 
the time or the ability to be able to help these folks find a decent 
place to live. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as you know, a roof over your head is 
always one of the most important things when we’re talking 
about harm reduction, when we’re talking about homelessness. 
And unfortunately for these folks, it even came to the point 



3556 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2018 

where they were forced to leave that place because they 
couldn’t live there anymore, and they ended up on the street and 
at the Lighthouse. But the rules at the Lighthouse wouldn’t 
allow them to stay together, and the mom was terrified of being 
separated from her son. It was a horrible situation, and they 
ended up living outside for a few days before these good 
Samaritans stepped in. So those are sort of the extreme stories 
that we hear. 
 
I remember reading another story in The Walrus actually, I 
think it was, about a professional tenant who would basically 
screw over the landlords over and over and over again. This 
person found ways to use the Residential Tenancies Act — I 
think it was in Ontario — to abuse landlords to the point of 
unbelievable proportions. I couldn’t believe how clever this 
fellow was, and how he was able to work the system to the 
point where landlords were out thousands and thousands of 
dollars. They would find themselves in court, and their 
residences were trashed, and it was almost psychotic, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so I think those are the sort of extremes you can see when 
it comes to residential tenancies and the landlord and the tenant 
relationship. I know that when the housing, the rental shortages 
hit our cities, both your city of Regina and our city of Saskatoon 
a few years ago, and it was very difficult for people to find even 
a place to live. The rents were soaring and people were finding 
it very, very difficult to even pay rent in order to have a roof 
over their head. 
 
So when the market drives rental prices, it puts a lot of people 
in very, very difficult situations, because of course rents are 
going up but their income isn’t going up, so it makes a very 
difficult time for people. And I know that obviously if the 
market is soft and there’s lots of locations, then rents can 
actually in some cases go down, and I think that has happened 
overall in Saskatoon at least. So those kinds of things, when 
people are on fixed incomes . . . I’ve talked to many seniors 
who were terrified because they were being basically booted out 
of their apartment of 20 years because of rent increases. 
 
[15:45] 
 
There’s a building right across the street from my constituency 
office where it had been managed for 20, 30 years by some 
local Saskatoon businessmen. Elderly women, widows had 
lived there for 20 years. I’d go visit them when I was door 
knocking, Mr. Speaker. And all of a sudden they sold the 
building to a developer from Vancouver, and it was completely 
gutted. These folks were told, if you’re not prepared to pay 
twice the rent, you have to leave. 
 
They all did leave. They couldn’t afford to live there anymore. 
And then ironically this developer went bankrupt because he 
had overextended himself, and then Block 1 took over, and so it 
just seemed like a greedy situation, Mr. Speaker. And a lot of 
good people who had lived in my constituency, Nutana, for 20, 
30 years as retirees, living on fixed incomes, were forced to 
relocate in the city. 
 
And so those kinds of stories I think we hear about a lot. And 
The Residential Tenancies Act is the intervention of the 
government and of law to try and balance those types of 

relationships. 
 
So in this particular bill, there’s a couple of things that are being 
attempted. And the very first one I find is really kind of curious 
because there’s a change being made to the right of the landlord 
to impose rules. Now as you know, Mr. Speaker, landlords can 
impose a lot of rules. You know, I mean, they can’t really tell 
people how to live, but this clause actually sort of does tell 
people how to live, in particular in relation to the use of 
cannabis. So a change is being made. 
 
The existing clause is section 22.1 of The Residential Tenancies 
Act. So I’m just going to share that right now. The original 
clause reads: 
 

Subject to subsection (2), in addition to the obligations set 
out in a tenancy agreement, a landlord may establish and 
enforce rules about: 
 

(a) the tenant’s use, occupancy or maintenance of the 
rental unit or residential property; and 
 
(b) the tenant’s use of services and facilities. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, that seems to be a very straightforward clause. 
It does give the landlord a lot of power in terms of telling 
tenants what they can or cannot do when you think about their 
rules about their use, occupancy, and maintenance of the rental 
unit. So that’s a pretty heavy ability for a landlord to be able to 
impose on tenants. I never really experienced, as when I was a 
tenant, too many requirements from my landlords. I think they 
generally were pretty hands off. 
 
But the change that’s being added to this clause reads this — 
I’ll read the new section, 22.1(1): 

 
(a) the tenant’s use, occupancy or maintenance of the 
rental unit or residential property, [and here’s the 
change] including rules prohibiting the possession, use, 
selling or distribution of cannabis or the growing and 
possession of cannabis plants in the rental unit. 

 
So that’s the change that’s being added, Mr. Speaker. And I 
really am struggling with the public policy reasons for this 
clause. It seems pretty vague, and I’m not really sure what the 
attempt is here to deal with because, if you think about it, if 
you’re a medicinal user of prescribed marijuana your landlord 
can now tell you and create rules about how you’re taking that 
medicine.  
 
I think that’s a pretty invasive power to be giving to landlords, 
and I’m not sure if that was intended by this section or not. 
There’s no sort of talk in here. It just says cannabis. It doesn’t 
say medicinal marijuana. It doesn’t say medicinal cannabis. It 
doesn’t say recreational cannabis. So there’s no distinction in 
this clause about what type of cannabis we’re talking about. So 
I think that raises a whole host of questions and issues that 
would be very concerning for individuals who, for whatever 
reason, have medicinal marijuana. It’s becoming more and more 
used as a powerful tool for pain relief for a lot, a lot, a lot of 
people suffering. 
 
So what is the intent here? What is the public policy intent for 



March 21, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3557 

this government to give landlords the right to tell medicinal 
marijuana users how they can use medicinal marijuana? I’m not 
sure if that’s overreach. I would call that an overreach, and I’m 
not sure if that’s the overreach that the government intended or 
not. But I think it’s loose wording and it’s going to raise a lot of 
concerns. 
 
On the flip side of that, Mr. Speaker, as you know, when 
marijuana is being smoked it’s an acrid-smelling substance, 
right? It’s like cigarettes, and many people are sensitive to those 
types of odours. So I can see why a landlord would want to be 
able to tell cannabis users who smoke cannabis that they can’t 
use it in the rental building. I know there’d be lots of complaints 
if people were allowed to light up marijuana when they aren’t 
able to light up cigarettes, for example. However, this clause 
doesn’t restrict cigarette use; it only restricts cannabis use. So 
again, I question what the intent of this clause is. 
 
I was talking to my colleague from Saskatoon Fairview and we 
thought, well maybe there’s concerns about hydroponic 
growing, using hydroponic tools and methods to grow 
marijuana in a tenancy unit. And again, we’ve seen horror 
stories about the damages that illegal marijuana growing has 
caused in a number of housing units. Houses have been 
destroyed, extreme use of power — there’s all kinds of things 
that could go wrong when somebody is illegally growing . . . 
grow ops, I guess, is the term that’s used. And so maybe that’s 
what this clause is attempting to deal with. 
 
But it’s not specific to grow ops. In fact, grow ops aren’t even 
mentioned directly. It does say, growing and possession of 
cannabis plants. But if an individual has one cannabis plant 
sitting on their, you know, piano, I mean, is that what the 
landlord’s . . . is that what the intent of this is to deal with, is to 
give landlords the right to tell people they can or cannot have 
marijuana plants when it’s a perfectly legal substance once it’s 
legalized. So those are some interesting concerns. 
 
Now my colleague from Regina Elphinstone-Centre just 
pointed out to me a story that was published yesterday in the 
Regina Leader-Post, and this is an important case. This case 
establishes the right to protection for all tenants from harmful 
second-hand smoke. And the article goes on to say, the case 
stems from complaints of four tenants of the Regina Housing 
Authority buildings that allowed smoking after they suffered 
health complications. And it says: 
 

For the first time in Saskatchewan, a court has upheld the 
right of tenants to be free from “unreasonable” 
second-hand smoke — even in a building that allows 
smoking. 

 
And it goes on to talk about the case at hand. But again, you 
know, when you’re a tenant, you don’t want to be made sick by 
something that’s happening in the apartment next to you or in 
the housing unit next to you. And certainly second-hand smoke 
is a major concern. 
 
So from a public policy perspective, I can see why the 
government would want to allow landlords to make those rules. 
But it seems to me it should be limited to second-hand smoke 
concerns or hydroponic damage to the rental unit. That seems 
reasonable. But to merely possess cannabis, and it doesn’t 

separate medical use or recreational use, that seems to go a little 
too far, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t think the government in their 
second reading speech has given us any indication what indeed 
is the true intent of this. 
 
And then I ask myself, Mr. Speaker, well why wouldn’t we then 
allow landlords to make rules about possession, use, and selling 
or distributing homemade wine, wine kits? Those are similar. 
Alcohol, as we know, is a drug of sorts, so why would they 
single out cannabis here and not tobacco or not alcohol? And I 
just don’t understand where these changes are coming from. I 
know we’re going to have to ask questions about that in 
committee once we get an opportunity to do that. 
 
So that particular clause seems kind of out of nowhere; it seems 
not thought out well at all. It certainly doesn’t provide for 
medical users of marijuana and cannabis for prescribed health 
treatments, and I don’t think that’s something this government 
really intended, although maybe they do intend that. But I think 
this is a very poorly written clause and it’s one that will be, I 
think, attacked and subject to attack if it’s left in its current 
form. 
 
I’ll just move on now, on to other changes that are being 
proposed. There’s some, I think some balancing that’s 
happening here in changes to section 70(14). So currently 
section 70 — have to find the right clause again, Mr. Speaker 
— section 70(14) tells us that the director . . . The context of 
this clause, it’s a very long clause. This is applications to the 
director for a dispute. So this is going to the residential 
tenancies director for a dispute between a landlord and a tenant. 
So these are all the rules for the hearings when there is a 
residential tenancies hearing. Section 14 as it currently exists 
says: 
 

The director may refuse to issue a written notice of hearing 
to, and a hearing officer may decline to make an order 
respecting, a landlord who: 
 

is in contravention of an order made pursuant to this Act; 
or 
 
has failed to forward a security deposit and any accrued 
interest to the director pursuant to section 33. 

 
So in this case this only applies to landlords. And it says if you, 
the landlord, are in arrears or contravention to any order or fail 
to forward a security deposit to the director, you cannot apply 
for a hearing. So I think it’s a pretty effective tool to ensure that 
landlords make the payments, follow the orders, and basically 
behave. 
 
The minister indicated that this is imbalanced because we didn’t 
have a countervailing clause that would apply to the tenants. So 
I think the intent here now is to add a new clause, subsection 
70(14.1). And now this clause will read: 
 

“The director may refuse to issue a written notice of 
hearing to, and a hearing officer may decline to make an 
order representing a tenant who is in contravention of an 
order that was previously made pursuant this Act and that 
is currently in force”. 

 



3558 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2018 

So I think, Mr. Speaker, this balancing clause will deal with 
those tenants who are not behaving, who are not following the 
orders, where they’ve done something wrong and there’s been 
an order issued against them. They won’t be able to go to the 
director for a hearing for another matter if they haven’t 
followed the orders that have been made against them in 
previous matters. And I think that would help deal with the 
tenant I was talking about earlier who worked the system so 
well and got a lot of people, landlords, in serious trouble 
because he was just working the system. So this at least is, I 
think, an attempt to ensure that those types of tenants don’t get 
away with that kind of behaviour. 
 
There’s a change in the appeals section. And again this is 
whether or not someone who’s unhappy with a decision made 
by the hearing officer or the director can go to court and get an 
appeal. This is being changed a little bit in clause (1.3), where 
it’s being repealed and there’s a new clause being substituted. 
So the previous clause talks about, under the regulations, 
subject to the regulations, I’ll actually read the clause, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s (1.3): 
 

Subject to the regulations, if a tenant is appealing from an 
order issuing a writ of possession pursuant to subsection 
70(13) with respect to a failure to vacate a property in 
accordance with a notice served pursuant to subsection 
57(1), the appellant shall deposit with the local registrar: 
 

the equivalent of one-half of one month’s rent; or 
 
proof satisfactory to the local registrar that the tenant’s 
rent is fully paid. 

 
So here we have the situation where a tenant has an order 
against them for whatever reason and there’s a writ of 
possession. So the landlord is taking back the tenant’s unit or 
rental space. 
 
Then the appellant, if the tenant wants to appeal that, right now 
he has to give the equivalent of one-half of one month’s rent or 
proof of payment of rent. The changes that are being proposed 
here are as follows. The new clause will read: 
 

Subject to the regulations, a tenant may appeal an order 
issuing a writ of possession pursuant to subsection 70(13) 
with respect to a failure to vacate a property in accordance 
with a notice served pursuant to subsection 57(1) only if 
[and here’s the change] the tenant continues to pay to the 
landlord the rent required to be paid pursuant to the 
tenancy agreement. 

 
[16:00] 
 
So this means that no longer does the tenant get away with only 
paying one-half of the rent. They have to actually pay the full 
rent to the landlord, even though they’re appealing a decision of 
the board. And again, I think this will deal with those situations 
where tenants work the system and take advantage of the 
loopholes to refuse to pay rent and they’re still living in the 
unit. In the current situation, they would only have to pay 
one-half of their rent. So I think that’s a balancing act that the 
minister’s attempting to do here, and it seems to make sense. 
 

Section 85 is also being repealed and substituted. And what’s 
happening here, this is the removal and disposition of 
abandoned goods by a landlord. Mr. Speaker, the other day I 
was hearing on the radio about a new thing that’s happening 
where people are . . . There are storage units, there’s a new style 
of storage unit where you can actually have wine tasting parties. 
It’s sort of like a chi-chi storage unit. And the problem is, is that 
people have too much stuff. They simply have too much stuff. 
 
And I know when I moved into the rental place that I stay here 
in Regina, the previous tenants left behind all kinds of stuff and 
the landlord had to deal with that, including beds that actually 
had bed bugs in them, Mr. Speaker. So that is a real problem for 
landlords. 
 
And people acquire so much stuff now, and if they downsize 
and move to a smaller space or just . . . I know I have too many 
books and they just keep growing in the bookshelves in my 
home. So there’s an accumulation of stuff, I think, that is 
happening in North America in particular, and I’m not sure 
about other parts of the world, where we just consume so much 
and we acquire so much stuff, we either leave it behind when 
we move or we have to get these fancy rental units, storage 
units, to go and visit our stuff, I guess. I mean it’s just a bit 
strange. 
 
Anyways, this whole section is a long section, and it deals with 
removal and disposition of abandoned goods by the landlord. 
So if a tenant takes off and leaves things behind, there are a 
number of provisions here which allows the landlord to get rid 
of this stuff that’s been left behind, abandoned goods. 
 
Now there is some new sections that are being added. And it’s a 
new subsection 4, subsection 5, and subsection 6. And I’m just 
going to refer to the explanatory notes that have been provided 
as well so that we can understand what the intent of these 
changes are. Basically it makes it clear, and this is from the 
explanation on page six of the explanatory notes: 
 

The new section 85 makes it clear that a landlord can 
dispose of abandoned property of a tenant without an order 
from the ORT if the value of the property is less than 
$1,500. The landlord continues to have the obligation to 
attempt to locate the tenant prior to disposing of the 
property. 
 

In all other cases, if it’s obviously more than $1,500, the 
landlord is obligated to get an order from the Office of 
Residential Tenancies, the ORT, before disposing of the 
abandoned property. And of course, the landlord can deduct 
their expenses from the proceeds of the disposal, and then the 
rest has to go to the ORT to hold for the tenant for six months. 
And if the tenant hasn’t claimed those funds, they go to the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
So I think that’s an interesting clause, Mr. Speaker. When you 
think about it, tenant abandons goods; the landlord has to go to 
all the effort and work to clean it up, try to sell it, try to make 
money from those goods. And if the landlord makes more than 
what the landlord’s efforts are, that money goes to the GRF 
[General Revenue Fund], the Minister of Finance. It’s kind of a 
good deal for the government when they get to collect that 
money. I’m not sure it would be a huge amount of money. And 



March 21, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3559 

now I’m curious. I wonder exactly how much money does go to 
the Minister of Finance from the sale of abandoned goods. And 
I guess I’ll be able to ask those questions in committee as well. 
 
And of course if the landlord disposes of the property in 
accordance with the provision, they’re not responsible to the 
tenant for the removal, sale, or disposition of the property. So 
this is a clause, I think, that again adds more of the balance that 
the minister was referring to in his second reading speech 
comments. So, again, people abandoning their stuff are going to 
have to make reasonable efforts to get rid of it or claim it. 
Otherwise, the landlord is being given additional authority to 
get rid of it, especially if it’s less than $1,500. 
 
And, you know, I think it’s hard to imagine a situation where 
someone might leave behind something worth more than 
$1,500, but I am probably a little naive in that, Mr. Speaker, as 
who knows what people walk away from. And sometimes they 
just get overwhelmed by all the things they have and if they 
have to move to another city, they’re forced, if they don’t have 
a way to move their stuff, they’re forced to leave it behind. So it 
may so happen that there’s a number of instances where people 
have to leave stuff behind that’s worth more than $1,500. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve pretty much covered the changes 
that are being proposed here. I really am truly concerned about 
the intent of the insertion of allowing the landlord to dictate to 
the tenant how they may use cannabis. And we don’t know if 
it’s medicinal cannabis or residential cannabis. We don’t know 
if it’s intended to be directed to hydroponic activity or sales. Of 
course those would be illegal sales if they’re not sold properly, 
and I would imagine that would be criminal activity. So of 
course a landlord can deal with criminal activity. But for 
recreational users who are growing one plant, why would that 
be any different than growing your own tobacco, or preparing 
homemade wine, or even having alcohol, Mr. Speaker? So it’s a 
very strange clause, and I think we’ll have some questions for 
the minister at the time when this bill is being considered in 
committee. 
 
But at this point in time, I know that other of my colleagues will 
want an opportunity to speak to this bill, and I’ve exhausted my 
comments, so I move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 115, The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 115, The Residential 
Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 94 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cox that Bill No. 94 — The 
Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings 
(SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 

Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter into debate today on Bill No. 94, An Act to suspend Grant 
Payments pursuant to The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for 
Education Savings (SAGES) Act. 
 
My colleagues across the aisle were chuckling a little bit as I 
was grabbing a different piece of paper. But the reason I was 
doing so, Mr. Speaker, is I wanted to read the full title of this 
Act and not the short title, because the short title of this Act 
doesn’t have the word “suspend” in it. And I feel like that is a 
key piece to the legislation that’s being proposed here. It’s 
simply called an amendment Act, so I was looking for the full 
title to give people a full idea of what we’re going to be talking 
about here today. 
 
And the interesting thing about that title, Mr. Speaker, is it 
contains the words “Saskatchewan Advantage,” which are two 
words that we heard quite a bit of, and I heard quite a bit of a 
number of years ago before I ever entered this House, before I 
knew I’d be entering this House, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan Advantage. And this is what was being pitched 
to us and people across this province. So I think that there is 
something somewhat poetic about the fact that there’s a 
suspension to this grant right now, Mr. Speaker, considering the 
language that they chose to employ with it. 
 
So some of the changes that are being proposed here are related 
to the fact that this suspension is taking place. I’ll provide a 
little bit of a background on what SAGES is. I don’t know 
whether to say “is” or “was” because we’re talking about a 
suspension which, you know, could very well end up as a 
permanent suspension, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in the 2017-2018 budget, the Sask Party announced that 
SAGES would be suspended as of January 1st, 2018. This is a 
program that provided a grant that would match 10 per cent of 
subscribers’ RESP [registered education savings plan] 
contributions to a maximum of $250 per child per year and a 
lifetime maximum of $4,500. So the Sask Party announced that 
they would be cutting this grant. And this is, of course, one of 
the many cuts to advanced education that we’ve seen with the 
Sask Party in their budget. So this is making it harder for 
families to be able to save for education, which we know is 
quite costly. So I’m going to spend a little bit of time talking 
about some of these concerns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So from the explanatory notes that were provided — we get 
explanatory notes any time it’s an amendment to a piece of 
legislation — we find that the SAGES eligible contributions are 
going to be suspended as of January 1st, 2018, that are made 
into RESPs. The program is going to continue to operate 
because there’s existing money in that program, Mr. Speaker, 
and it needs to be managed, but this is what we’re looking at. 
 
I sort of missed the press conference on this. I didn’t see a 
grand announcement coming from the members on the opposite 
side, but I guess this is something you would want to be 
downplaying a little bit more, Mr. Speaker. I missed the press 
conference on stopping this program here, suspending this 
program, just like I missed the press conference on a number of 
other cuts to education that we’ve seen — you know, cuts to our 
secondary education as well, you know, kindergarten through 
grade 12, and cuts to post-secondary, the elimination of the 



3560 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2018 

tuition credit, which is also a big concern, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’re talking about the fact that this tax season is going to 
hit people quite a bit harder this year. So students are being cut 
so much harder this year, Mr. Speaker. They’re being hit so 
much harder and at a time where they’re finding out that they’re 
not getting that tuition credit, it’s quite difficult for them and, 
you know, it’s just showing . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Just 
allow people to be calm a little bit here. 
 
And in addition to the elimination of the first home plan, Mr. 
Speaker, which was a carrot that was dangled in front of a 
number of graduates, that they were going to be able to have 
$10,000 toward an interest-free loan to go toward the down 
payment of their first houses. And I know this has hit a number 
of people personally, Mr. Speaker, and to share a personal 
situation, hit my family directly. 
 
My partner and I were looking to buy a house last year. We 
were counting on this additional $10,000. You know the down 
payments are not easy to come up with and it took us — we’re 
in a lucky situation — it only took us a year to be able to get to 
the point where we could make up that money ourselves, but we 
were very much looking forward to using the first home plan 
and didn’t have that as an option. We went through all the steps 
and checked out all the paperwork and heard right as the budget 
was dropping. You know, it was in tax season, about a month 
prior that we’d been looking into it and really exploring the fact 
that we were going to be moving last year. 
 
So in our case in particular, absolutely prevented us from being 
able to buy our home together, which I know is something that 
people can relate to, is an important step, and it definitely 
pushed that back for us. 
 
And of course we’ve seen cuts to the University of 
Saskatchewan — 5.6 per cent overall — the $20 million cut to 
the College of Medicine that was only reversed, you know, after 
we saw that the med school was in danger, and cuts to our K to 
12 [kindergarten to grade 12] education system as well, $54 
million that was cut from K to 12. Now the Premier’s offering 
back $30 million, which is definitely not the full amount, 
expecting people, that they’re going to be very excited about 
that, by way of providing 7.5 million. So the numbers just don’t 
add up. 
 
Those jobs are gone. Those positions have been cut. You know, 
people have lost their livelihoods because of these cuts. And 
you can’t just simply reverse it and hope that it’s going to go 
away, especially when you’re not providing that full amount. So 
this goes right in line with all of the cuts that we’ve seen. 
 
My colleague from Athabasca, when he was providing his 
thoughts on second reading, Mr. Speaker, he talked about a 
press release that the Sask Party government provided on May 
22, 2017 that said, “Our government’s focus is on students. . . . 
We must ensure that they continue to have access to high 
quality . . . education.” So one would assume that the focus 
being on students would mean that this would still be seen as an 
investment, Mr. Speaker. So the question becomes, why were 
the Sask Party motivated to make this change? 
 
[16:15] 

And I put in some written questions — question no. 96 and 97 
from last session, Mr. Speaker — and I asked about what the 
overall value was of the provincial government contribution 
from 2013 to 2017. I found that in the 2013-2014 fiscal year, it 
was under $1 million that was provided in total SAGES 
payments, and it moved up to 10.6 million in 2016-2017, and 
nearly 6 million for the first portion of 2017 to 2018 up until 
November of 2017. So that would be about halfway through the 
fiscal year, leading us to believe it would’ve been about 
$12,000 total. 
 
So I had a look at Public Accounts 2016-2017 to look at 
estimates to see what the Sask Party was estimating they would 
spend on this. And they had estimated for 2016-2017 that it 
would be 6.5 million when in fact it was around $9 million. So I 
think, I suspect they were spending more than they had 
anticipated and that that led to a little bit of the concern over 
why a suspension should take place. 
 
Now I also asked a question about the total number of SAGES 
recipients at the end of each year. Of course, these are 
cumulative numbers. It’s not necessarily a different person 
that’s benefiting the next year as did the year prior. But in 
2017-2018 there were a total of 64,441 students that stood to 
benefit from these RESPs — 64,000. So this is that many 
families who were saving for their kids’ education, who were 
doing what many believe to be parental duties in looking out for 
their children and their children’s future, and doing so, you 
know, one would suspect quite proudly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m not sure why these investments were viewed to be a 
priority when they were introduced, when this program was 
introduced, but are not a priority now, and why they’re not seen 
as an investment. So it’s curious that this would be the direction 
we would be going in, would be to choose to cut these 
programs. I submit that we need to invest in education, Mr. 
Speaker, that education leads to jobs. 
 
And I have a report that specifically looks at some of these 
ideas, Mr. Speaker, and it’s put forward by C.D. Howe Institute. 
It’s called Risk and Readiness: The Impact of Automation on 
Provincial Labour Markets. And of course as job critic I’m 
quite concerned with what the labour market looks like right 
now, what’s being done in the province, Mr. Speaker. So I read 
this report with enthusiasm back in the wintertime to look at 
where we were at in Saskatchewan and the automation of 
labour. And I promise you it directly relates to this piece of 
legislation. 
 
So in the overall summary of this study, it talks about the fact 
that, as the demand for skills in labour markets continues to 
grow, there’s room for public policy to moderate the effect of 
technological change on the labour market in a number of ways. 
This is perhaps a different view than the Economy minister has 
that he was voicing in question period today, Mr. Speaker, that 
we should let it be. But there are some occasions for 
government intervention that can be most beneficial to the 
province and our provincial economy. 
 
So maybe this is one of the areas we should be looking at is our 
investment in education. So this commentary assesses the risk 
that in each province workers could be replaced by machines 
and the readiness of those workers to adapt to technological 



March 21, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3561 

change. So on page 4: 
 

In this context . . . workers in New Brunswick, 
Newfoundland and Labrador and Saskatchewan are the 
most susceptible to disruption due to technological change, 
while those in Ontario, British Columbia and Alberta face 
the least risk of labour market disruption due to 
technological change. 

 
On page 11, Mr. Speaker, it summarizes what the two measures 
were to be able to make this assessment, and so the first 
measure was core skills. So the indicators were literacy, 
numeracy, problem solving in a technologically rich 
environment, many of these skills, Mr. Speaker, which can be 
learned through the K to 12 education program. The second 
indicator was simply and directly, advanced education, Mr. 
Speaker. So the per cent of the population with a post-graduate 
degree and employment rate for people with a post-graduate 
degree. So whether people have education and whether they are 
able to find employment in their line of work. 
 
So this directly points to the fact that education levels are the 
key to the future of our economy in Saskatchewan, are going to 
make such a difference for us, and we should be seeing 
advanced education as a way to help us through technological 
advancement in the future and to help us through coping with 
these changes. 
 
So having been through a lot of post-secondary education 
myself, we were discussing this a little bit before . . . As I was 
preparing for the bill, I was discussing with some of my 
colleagues, Mr. Speaker, I’ve spent, it’s hard to believe, 13 
years receiving post-secondary education. And it wasn’t all in 
one degree so don’t worry, it wasn’t like I was trying the same 
class over and over again. But through the University of 
Saskatchewan getting an undergraduate degree in sociology and 
getting a master’s degree in sociology, and then through the 
Royal Military College getting a master’s in public 
administration, I have spent a great deal of time in a 
post-secondary institution paying tuition, Mr. Speaker. So I 
know first-hand how expensive it can be to be in these 
situations. My parents are fantastic people but absolutely did 
not have the money to be putting away for my education. And I 
know that if they had an opportunity to participate in a program 
like this, they would have been very happy to be able to do so. 
 
And so many people like myself, Mr. Speaker, end up relying 
on student loans which are a great system for us. But at the end 
of the day, when you start paying back your student loans as I 
have been doing, the interest rate is quite high. It’s prime plus 5 
per cent which is quite a high interest rate on a loan to be faced 
with. You end up paying so much money in interest and not 
paying down the principal. And it really, especially if you don’t 
have a good-paying job right when you get out of 
post-secondary, it can be very, very difficult to be able to make 
those monthly payments. 
 
And they even have, you know, set-ups for deferred payments 
and that sort of thing. And they send you a letter right away 
saying if you can’t make these payments, call us and we’ll work 
with you because, I would assume, of how frequent it is that 
people have trouble paying those back. So student loans are 
challenging and shouldn’t be the only option. 

And if we are really looking at the value of education in saying 
that we prioritize education as the government has done, I 
cannot understand how we would be suspending a program that 
encourages families to save money, that encourages and leads 
to 64,000 future students having money to pay for their 
advanced education at a time where we need that, our economy 
needs it. It’s a chance for us to be able to stimulate our 
economy and intervene where appropriate. 
 
So I will leave more comments on this . . . I’ve been quite 
long-winded. I will leave more comments on this to my 
colleagues, and we’ll have more questions in committee for 
sure. But with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn 
debates on Bill 94. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 94, The Saskatchewan 
Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment 
Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 95 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 95 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always my 
pleasure to enter into debate here in this House, today on Bill 
No. 95, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 
2017. We often have miscellaneous statutes repeal and 
amendment Acts before us, Mr. Speaker, usually every year. As 
the minister points out in his second reading speech, this 
particular legislation repeals legislation that he says has become 
outdated and obsolete. And I would argue sometimes it’s not 
that the legislation has become outdated or obsolete. In some 
cases it has, but in some cases it’s been a different direction the 
government has taken, particularly in this case one of the bills 
being amended is around the film tax credit. But I’ll get to that 
in a few moments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the minister does point out, just interestingly enough 
around some obsolete legislation, he talks about legislation that 
existed even before he was in law school, Mr. Speaker, which I 
suspect was a very, very long time ago. I’m not one to comment 
on those kinds of things but he did acknowledge that. But some 
of the legislation that is being repealed or amended here, there’s 
. . . This proposed legislation repeals several Acts and proposes 
housekeeping amendments to others, so for example The Child 
and Family Services Amendment Act, 2003 is repealed. New 
amending legislation to The Child and Family Services Act was 
introduced this particular session, and that’s the same for The 
Income Tax Act and The Penalties and Forfeitures Act. Certain 
Acts appear to be directly repealed, like The Closing-out Sales 
Act, The Community Bonds Act, and The Home Energy Loan 



3562 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2018 

Act. A section of The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act had a section repealed related to public 
disclosure and the confidentiality requirements in the Act. And 
this is definitely something that our critic and our caucus office 
will look into a little bit further. 
 
There’s some housekeeping to clean up a section never 
proclaimed in The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act, 2010. 
The bill repeals a section of The Power Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2001 that relates to recourse for payments 
owed. And I know I’ve had some colleagues who’ve been 
around a little bit longer than me, Mr. Speaker, who’ve been 
interested in the repeal of the Enterprise Saskatchewan bill. We 
know that actually the government stopped funding Enterprise 
Saskatchewan in 2013 and we do know from times before me in 
this House that Enterprise Saskatchewan was a particularly fond 
project of the premier of Saskatchewan, the previous Premier 
Wall. You could perhaps even say that it was his pet project, so 
it must be very hard for this government to see it go. 
 
We need to point to an article in 2007 by the now retired 
reporter Bruce Johnstone who wrote for the Leader-Post: 
“Enterprise Saskatchewan, Premier-elect Brad Wall’s vision of 
how to manage the province’s economic development, could be 
the biggest achievement of his administration. Or it could be the 
biggest flop.” 
 
So I guess if we’re repealing that, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear 
where we landed on that particular issue, Mr. Speaker. I know 
my colleague from Elphinstone-Centre had quite enjoyed, or 
put many good remarks on the record regarding this particular 
bill, around Enterprise Saskatchewan. 
 
But I think for me, as a former Culture critic, I couldn’t help but 
be drawn to part 2 of this particular bill. And under 
consequential amendments it still is referring to the film 
employment tax credit. It’s being amended in a few different 
ways, Mr. Speaker, so I would suspect because you can’t . . . 
Even though the program is dead, there is still the possibility, I 
suppose, of people filing tax on that. But I think it takes me to 
the policy question of whether or not we should have cut the 
film employment tax credit. 
 
I think I’ve been quite clear where I and our caucus have stood 
on this over the years, but it’s been six years now since that 
budget where the government cut the film employment tax 
credit. That was in the spring of 2002, and I can tell you and I 
know, Mr. Speaker, that you know people who have left this 
province due to that cut. I want to talk a little bit about . . . And 
I would say that was an incredibly short-sighted cut. 
 
[16:30] 
 
I’m not alone in that. The Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce actually at the time put out a report with SaskFilm. 
And I just want to point you to an article on CBC News, CBC 
Saskatchewan from October 30th, 2012, when we were in the 
legislative session at that point in time. And in this particular 
report commissioned by the chamber it found the net cost to 
taxpayers of the film tax credit was lower than the government 
had said, at just over $1 million a year. But the net economic 
benefit of the film tax credit was $44.5 million. 
 

The CEO of the chamber, Steve McLellan, said, “In this case it 
is very clear that the processes used by the province to cut this 
program had many flaws. Key facts were missing and no 
consultations were done before the announcement of what some 
thought would be a simple program cut.” He went on to say that 
the decision showed the provincial government lacked 
“sector-specific knowledge” and transparency. And he went on 
to say that the chamber would have approved spending $1 
million per year in return for the 850 jobs it supported. 
 
This was a real issue, not just for New Democrats on this side 
of the House, but people all over Saskatchewan. I know that 
there were many people who wrote to the premier and the 
minister responsible at that time who weren’t New Democrats 
or weren’t partisans. They were simply people who knew that 
the film industry reaped many benefits for the people of 
Saskatchewan, including things like pride of place. It’s always 
pretty cool to see, even if your community is portrayed as 
somewhere else, it’s pretty cool to recognize, hey, I know that 
building and that building is in my hometown community. 
 
So that pride of place, the opportunity to tell our stories, there 
were many . . . We did do some service productions from the 
United States, Mr. Speaker, but there were a lot of opportunities 
and some really, some award-winning producers who made 
productions that reflected Saskatchewan stories, Mr. Speaker. 
Corner Gas I believe was in over 100 different countries around 
the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Economic spinoffs, that’s something that we really need to talk 
about right now and it’s important to recognize that having a 
film tax credit right now, although not a panacea — it wouldn’t 
be the silver bullet for our diverse economy — but it certainly 
would help at a time where we hear about major job losses here 
in Saskatchewan. We continue to hear this. In the last couple of 
days, the story around mortgage arrears, the number of families 
in Saskatchewan, close to 1,000 in this last little while, who’ve 
gone into mortgage arrears because our natural resource 
economy has had some challenges. We’ve got a national rate of 
mortgage, or a provincial rate of people in arrears for their 
mortgages three times the national average. 
 
So you think about what having a more diverse economy like 
supporting the cultural sector through the film industry could 
have done to help level some of that out. We can look to places 
like Manitoba, for example, which has a very similar 
population, Mr. Speaker. I’m just going to use some technology 
here to take a look at some news stories as of very recent 
actually, looking at the Manitoba film industry. So we have the 
Manitoba film industry who is on track, so the film industry and 
film workers, the rate has grown by about 4.3 per cent per year 
according to a CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] 
article with the headline, “More Manitobans working in film 
industry, census shows.” And actually someone who is quoted, 
his name is Mr. Freeman, he is a . . . I need to start wearing 
reading glasses; I really do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Anyway, Alan Freeman, a retired cultural economist who had 
been reviewing the data around the size of the creative 
industries in Canada and the provinces says about Manitoba, he 
talks about the growth rate of the Manitoba film industry or the 
workforce by 4.3 per cent, and talks about the Canada-wide 
average. So Manitoba was lower, but he points out that: 



March 21, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3563 

“Those provinces that have big urban centres, so B.C., 
Ontario, Quebec, always do better. If you look at the rest of 
the pack, then Manitoba is up on the top,” he said. “We 
have 2,700 people working in the industry — for whom the 
industry gives employment . . . If you go into the 
micro-detail of what the industry’s doing, it’s a real 
success story.” 

 
We could be that success story, Mr. Speaker. And instead 
there’s been an exodus of film workers over the years since that 
cut in 2012, to places like BC, places like Manitoba, places like 
Ontario. I believe Manitoba is on track, I think close to . . . I 
think it was $130 million that I read, or $137 million, in film 
production this year. It was a record year for them. And they’re 
estimating that . . . I believe it was 130 or 137, but I closed the 
story that said that and I won’t take your time in searching for 
that. 
 
But I think it’s also important to look to the Saskatchewan 
numbers and the government’s argument at the time, why they 
cut the film tax credit. So in 2004, here in Saskatchewan, 
according to a Globe and Mail article . . . And I used to have 
these numbers on the tip of my tongue when I was the Culture 
critic, but I had to look them up. So in The Globe and Mail 
article in June 2012, it points out that the peak of the film 
industry in Saskatchewan was 67 million, and then in the fiscal 
year ’10-11 it dropped to 28.5 million. But there were some 
economic challenges here. We had just a couple of years prior 
to that a global economic meltdown, Mr. Speaker. We had a 
high Canadian dollar which made Saskatchewan and other 
provinces, to be quite honest, less appealing to those service 
productions from out of province. So I think it was unfair of the 
government. 
 
The government did talk about falling film production rates, but 
I don’t think they talked about it in the context of what was 
going on in the rest of the world, Mr. Speaker. And to think if 
we would’ve held on, I mean where our Canadian dollar is right 
now . . . You look at, like I said, Manitoba, BC, Ontario. BC is 
at the top of the pack now, and they are busier than they have 
ever been. I just spoke with someone, a gaffer in the film 
industry in BC a few days ago, and he was telling me he’s had 
his record two years in work, the busiest he’s ever been in BC 
right now. 
 
So I can’t help but think this government was stubborn and 
made a bad decision. And unlike their rhetoric around being 
willing to revisit decisions, Mr. Speaker, they buried their head 
in the sand and ignored the evidence, ignored evidence from 
folks like the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. They 
heard what they were hearing. They ignored what they heard 
from people across the province, from small towns, from larger 
centres. They ignored what they heard about the film industry’s 
impact on restaurants, on hotels, on clothing shops, on lumber 
yards. 
 
I had the opportunity to hear from a restaurateur about . . . well 
probably now a couple years ago, but he said his business had 
never recovered and never reached the levels it had. He’s a 
person in downtown Regina who said that, since the cut to the 
film tax credit had happened, that his business had seen a very 
noticeable decline in business and it was frustrating to him. It’s 
frustrating to people all across Saskatchewan, especially when 

we see where we’re at with some challenges with our economy, 
Mr. Speaker, and we see how other provinces are really reaping 
the benefits of a strong film industry supported by a film tax 
credit that helped generate that economic benefit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I know the minister talked about outdated and obsolete 
legislation in his speech. And again that language, sometimes 
the legislation is obsolete or outdated, especially when it 
perhaps is as old as the minister’s . . . long before the minister 
was in law school, perhaps. But I can tell you that this kind of 
legislation, these miscellaneous statutes Acts, often deal with 
unfortunate policy decisions this government has made. In this 
case we’re having an amendment to the film tax credit Act as it 
pertains to The Income Tax Act and it is just a shame that 
Saskatchewan is missing out on the booming film industry in 
the rest of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think about one of my dearest friends. Her daughter who is 
very interested in the film industry, she did a program in 
Saskatoon at Evan Hardy in grade 11, media school. She knew 
she wanted to be a producer. She loves the film industry. We do 
still have a film school here in Regina, but she knew that she 
needed to go somewhere where she could make contacts in that 
industry so she could actually be hired. So my good friend’s 
daughter is at school in Ryerson right now, in Ontario, which is 
sad for my good friend, my dear friend. But it’s also super 
expensive to live in Toronto, so she’s supporting her daughter, 
helping support her daughter to go to school in Toronto because 
this government cut the film tax credit. 
 
This is a government who bragged about attracting young 
people here, but we chased young people away when we did 
this. So I just think about people I know in my life and how it’s 
had an impact on them. And those stories, I think we all have 
those stories, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Anyway, I know that there are other bills to speak to today and 
the film tax credit portion is just a small piece of this bill. But 
again it’s a shame that the government was short-sighted six 
years ago. And I hope after our last budget last year, Mr. 
Speaker, that was incredibly damaging to so many people, that 
we see better from the government in the next few weeks when 
they present their budget. 
 
But with that, I would like to move to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 95, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 
2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 95, The Miscellaneous 
Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 97 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 97 — The 
Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 



3564 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2018 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I am 
pleased to be able to rise and enter into the debate today on The 
Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017. 
Reading through this bill brought me back to my law school 
days in the early ’90s when the whole notion of — they used to 
call it ADR — alternative dispute resolution was just starting to 
take hold in the legal world. 
 
And I think there are many reasons for looking at alternatives to 
dispute resolution as opposed to the court process, and first and 
foremost was the horrible cost of going through litigation within 
the civil court system. And so it was just sort of catching on. 
This was in the early ’90s. So by ’94 I was able to take a class 
in law school called the alternative dispute resolution class. It 
was a seminar and it was a great class, co-taught by Dan Ish 
from Saskatoon and Dan Hamoline. And it was actually one of 
my favourite classes that I took because it was a refreshing new 
look at how disputes are resolved in society and what the role of 
the court is in that process. 
 
So when you talk about resolution of disputes . . . And you 
think this can apply in so many circumstances, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But the dispute arises, and the first thing we always 
talk about in dispute resolution is whether or not that dispute 
can be resolved amongst the parties without help from anyone 
else or without resorting to a third party to resolve the dispute. 
 
And so, Madam Deputy Chair . . . Welcome to the Chair. Nice 
to see you there and pleased to be able to see a woman sitting in 
the seat. That’s a wonderful thing. I’m not sure, Madam Deputy 
Chair, if you’re the first female Deputy Chair but . . . No? I’m 
informed there have been other members in that spot, but look 
forward to addressing you. 
 
So in the dispute resolution, they called it a continuum. So the 
first matter in a dispute is obviously to talk to that person, and 
in this context we’re talking about family dispute resolution. As 
you can imagine, Madam Deputy Chair, the disputes for 
families are some of the most difficult and heart-wrenching 
disputes that ever I think we can think of, when children are 
involved, when there’s acrimony involved. And we’ve all heard 
examples of family disputes that have been heart-wrenching 
and very, very difficult, many in our own families or our 
friends’ and our neighbours’. 
 
The courts have struggled with this for a long, long time. And I 
think the first sort of recognition that this was a unique form of 
disputes that perhaps the law and the courts needed to respond 
to was the establishment of the family law court. And in 
Saskatoon there was a pilot project headed up by Judge Mary 
Carter, and this was a revolutionary approach to attempting to 
deal with those very, very difficult family law disputes which 
people struggle with so much. And I remember going . . . being 
involved through a friend in a family law dispute when I was in 
law school, and it was so emotional and so heartbreaking. And I 
was just a friend of the people that were arguing and in conflict. 
 
[16:45] 
 
So I think the establishment of the family law courts was a great 

start for looking at family disputes. It’s a very different thing 
than perhaps two businesses in a squabble about a contract. So 
it was a unique way for those disputes to be looked at. And 
when I go back to the continuum of dispute resolution, 
obviously if a couple can sort things out themselves and don’t 
have to resort to the courts, that’s a good thing. And I’m 
fortunate to say that I was able to do that with my ex-husband, 
and we never needed to resort to the courts. So that’s good. And 
I feel fortunate that I had a spouse . . . and also an ex-spouse, 
the father of my children. It was also something we were able to 
resolve amicably. And that’s the beginning. 
 
If you cannot find that resolution amongst yourselves, then 
there are a number of legal tools that we can go to. And even in 
any dispute, not necessarily a family dispute, your next step 
could be something called mediation, and courts use and 
mandate mediation now in many ways. I think people get a 
misconception of what mediation is supposed to do. It’s not 
intended to be solving the problem. Mediation is just an 
opportunity for people to explore to see if there is a win-win or 
a way for them to get to an agreement where their needs are 
met. 
 
And I think, as you can imagine, Madam Deputy Chair, in 
many family dispute situations, the raw emotion that’s still 
there is something that makes mediation very, very difficult. 
However there are highly trained and very skilled mediators 
who can allow the parties who are in conflict to find a space 
where they can see some common ground and move forward, 
and then take forward their dispute to a place where they can 
resolve it amongst themselves again. So there’s the role of 
mediation. 
 
The next step we always talked about, and you’ll find this in 
union disputes, is conciliation, where that’s a form really more 
unique to labour disputes which have their own body of law. 
And then we talk about arbitration before you go to court, so 
. . . Well farewell, Madam Deputy Chair, and welcome back, 
Mr. Speaker. Madam Deputy Speaker . . . We now have Mr. 
Speaker back in the Chair. 
 
And when you talk about arbitration, that is a unique form of 
dispute resolution again that I think has been used in very 
specific circumstances for many, many years. And most often I 
think it’s being used in the labour laws scenario where the 
party’s union and the management cannot come to an 
agreement. But if their collective agreement provides for 
binding arbitration, this is something they’ve negotiated in the 
past and saying, we agree that if we ever get to a point where 
we cannot come to a resolution, we will go before an arbitrator. 
 
And you might ask yourself, what’s the difference between an 
arbitrator and a court? Arbitration resembles the court process 
in many ways, but it takes away some of the formalities and the 
evidentiary rules that I think quite often . . . In a court situation, 
the legal counsel become embroiled in procedural disputes 
which sort of side rail or detract from the actual conflict itself. 
So arbitration has been seen as a very useful tool for large 
groups, for example, unions. And also I think it’s being applied 
in a whole host of other ways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what we see here in this Act to amend The Arbitration Act is 
the introduction of a whole new concept, and this is called 



March 21, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3565 

family arbitration. And apparently there are family arbitrators. 
This is a change that I think has evolved. 
 
When you talk about dispute resolution law, as I said, in the 
early ’90s that was becoming very popular, and then mediation 
was seen as a way to facilitate resolution disputes and even . . . 
Well I want to get into the conflict management, but conflict 
resolution. Not all disputes can be resolved, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s okay. That’s the human condition. What we need to do is 
be able to manage those conflicts so that people can move 
forward with their lives. 
 
So we saw in the early ’90s the evolution of what they called 
ADR, alternative dispute resolution, which in my mind, really 
there shouldn’t have been an “A” in front of it. It’s just dispute 
resolution and there’s a whole host of tools available. In more 
recent years, we’ve seen a movement within the practices of 
law in various provinces, something called collaborative law. 
And this again is an approach by legal counsel who recognize 
that courts are not always the best place to go for resolving a 
conflict or resolving a dispute, and often you can find ways 
collaboratively to come together and resolve the dispute. 
 
And it brings to mind, Mr. Speaker, the words of our new 
Lieutenant Governor, Thomas Molloy, because he talked today 
about as a society, some of the teachings of other people that we 
share the land with, and some particular First Nations in the 
North, where they called it the common bowl. And this is a 
place where we can all come together and collaborate to find 
resolution of disputes or manage disputes. 
 
I mean again we cannot ever resolve all the disputes and I could 
think of, you know, my friends and my family and my 
colleagues and there are often disputes that exist and we don’t 
always agree or don’t always see eye to eye. But it’s being 
respectful about that and working together collaboratively for 
the better good to ensure that we leave this place better than we 
found it, or that we treat each other with respect and kindness. 
And I guess as humans that’s an aspiration that is honourable 
and desirable. So family arbitration seems to be a new fallout 
from this notion of collaborative law. 
 
And I just want to read into the record a description of what 
family arbitration is because this is a paper from the United 
Kingdom. And for Hansard I’ll just give you the title: it’s from 
the Institute of Family Law Arbitrators, and it’s called A Guide 
to the Family Law Arbitration Scheme: An Introductory Guide 
for Family Arbitrators, Judges and Professional Referrers, 
Third Edition. So obviously it’s focusing on family law in the 
UK [United Kingdom] but I think it’s applicable to these 
changes to The Arbitration Act we see here today. 
 
So on page 3 it reads: 
 

Family arbitration in a nutshell 
 
1. Definition 
 

Family arbitration is a form of private dispute resolution 
in which the parties enter into an agreement under which 
they appoint a suitably qualified person (an “arbitrator”) 
to adjudicate a dispute and make an award. It can be 
used to resolve financial disputes and disputes 

concerning children. 
 

Family arbitration is thus akin to court proceedings in 
that a family arbitrator will produce a decision after 
hearing the evidence and each party’s case. In financial 
cases the decision is called an award and in children 
cases it is called a determination. 

 
They go on to describe the particular laws in the UK that give 
the authority for this family arbitration, and then they go on to 
say: 
 

Family arbitration is distinct from mediation in that a 
decision on the substance of the dispute between the 
parties may be imposed by the family arbitrator or 
arbitral tribunal. It is therefore binding upon the parties 
to the dispute. 
 
Mediation can take place in parallel with an on-going 
family arbitration: sometimes a family arbitrator may 
consider mediation would benefit a couple and he may 
suggest this. Conversely, mediators may recommend 
family arbitration if it seems clear that a dispute, or one 
aspect of it, cannot settle in mediation. 

 
I’ll just read one more part of this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

2. Background 
 

Arbitration is widely used in commercial disputes. In 
England and Wales, the domestic framework is provided 
by the Arbitration Act 1996 . . . [And of course we have 
comparable legislation here, Mr. Speaker.] The Act has a 
number of distinctive features, but is broadly comparable 
to arbitration legislation and regulation in other 
European states and the US, and to the United Nations 
Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) 
‘Model Law’ which has provided the basis for regulation 
of arbitration in Scotland and many other parts of the 
world. 
 

And then it goes on to say: 
 
The Act seeks to draw an appropriate balance between 
allowing parties freedom to determine the procedure for 
resolution of their dispute, while at the same time 
maintaining adequate supervision by the courts. 

 
And I’ll just stop there for a second. I think when you think 
about it, it seems to be necessary in family law disputes 
sometimes to have supervision, and I don’t know why. Of 
course we like to think as adults we can all get along and 
resolve these disputes, but we know darn well that’s not the 
case, Mr. Speaker, and so people need protection.  
 
And I think in a lot of family law disputes there is often an 
imbalance in power, imbalance in economic power, imbalance 
in emotional power. And so quite often people can become 
victims if the system isn’t attuned to that. And of course in 
many family law disputes some of the people that become 
victims would be children involved in the family breakdown or 
the marital breakdown anyways. So this is a vulnerable place 
for many people to find themselves in, and so having an ability 



3566 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2018 

to reach out to the court system, to the larger society to give you 
those protections you need . . . 
 
And I mean one doesn’t have to look much further than some of 
the marital property laws that came into Saskatchewan. I 
remember hearing professor Ellen . . . I forget the last name, 
already. She was one of the original judges . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . No, this is Schmeiser. Ellen Schmeiser was one 
of the people who brought in the matrimonial property law 
regime in the province of Saskatchewan in the 1970s. And I’ll 
never forget because the thought . . . and I think Louise Simard 
also mentioned this to me as well. She was very involved as a 
legislator when that law was brought in. And everyone thought 
that this would help younger women, like younger women 
would be the ones who would be coming forward with these 
matrimonial property law resolutions. What happened is that 
women who had been married 30, 40 years were the first ones 
to come forward because they’d been economically trapped in a 
marriage that they did not want to be part of, but they had no 
way to get out of. 
 
So when you think about the role of the courts, the role of 
society in assisting economic freedom and protection for 
women who were otherwise very, very vulnerable, it is certainly 
laudable and, I think, a sign that as a society when we come to 
the common bowl that we can look after women, we can look 
after children and provide them the supports, they need to not 
be caught up in this. 
 
So just specifically to the bill, Mr. Speaker, there’s a few 
definitions now being added such as “family arbitrator” and 
“family law dispute.” The regulations clause is being amended 
to allow the government to decide who is allowed to hang up 
their shingle as a family arbitrator and I think that’s a very . . . 
As a new profession, I think we have to pay a lot of close 
attention to make sure that people who designate themselves or 
hang up their shingle as a family arbitrator have the proper 
qualifications and experience to make those kinds of decisions 
because these are final decisions. 
 
Of course there is provision being made in this bill to ensure 
that if a decision was improper or unfair, there still will be an 
ability to go to the courts to make sure that there isn’t 
something that’s unfair happening. So courts can intervene in 
certain circumstances and set aside their arbitration agreement if 
they’re satisfied that one or more of the circumstances as set out 
in the Act are met. 
 
So I think there’s a lot of good changes being made here and, as 
I see this, this is a continual evolution of the role of courts in 
our society, the role of dispute resolution particularly when 
parties aren’t necessarily equal, particularly when there are 
children involved. 
 
The minister didn’t indicate where these changes were coming 
from or who was recommending them. We don’t know who 
he’s consulted with or whether this is just something that he 
came up with on his own or it’s something that was proposed 
by his officials. So I think we’ll want to know a little bit more 
in terms of how this evolution is happening. What’s the 
involvement of the Law Society? Are there other people 
involved that would be interested? 
 

So I think at this point, Mr. Speaker, I know other of my 
colleagues will want to speak to this bill, but I will move to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 97, The Arbitration (Family Dispute 
Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 97, The Arbitration 
(Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. It now being 5 p.m., this Assembly 
stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3535 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3535 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3535 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3535 
  Reiter ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3535, 3538 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3536 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3536 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3536 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3536 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3536 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3537 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3537 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3537 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3537 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3537 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3538 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3538 
 Lafleche Named Hockeyville Finalist 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3538 
 Canadian National Institute for the Blind Celebrates 100th Anniversary 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3539 
 World Down Syndrome Day 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3539 
 Royal University Hospital Foundation Radiothon 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3539 
 Saskatchewan’s 22nd Lieutenant Governor 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3539 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Management of Provincial Economy 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3540 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3540 
 Legal Counsel and Federal Carbon Pricing 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3540 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3541 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3541 
 Support for Special Needs in Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3541 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3542 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3542 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3542 
 Management of Global Transportation Hub 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3543 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3543 
 Ownership of Crown Corporations 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3544 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3544 
 Effects of Taxes on Provincial Economy 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3544 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3544 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3544 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 108 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3544 
 Bill No. 109 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2017 modifiant le droit législatif 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3545 
 Bill No. 74 — The Evidence Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative de 2017 sur la preuve 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3545 



 

 Bill No. 96 — The Choice of Court Agreements (Hague Convention Implementation) Act 
 Loi sur les accords d’élection de for (mise en œuvre de la Convention de La Haye) 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3546 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3546 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3546 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3546 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 121 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3546 
 Bill No. 122 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2018 
 Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act  
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3548 
 Bill No. 72 — The Privacy Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3548 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 3549 
 Bill No. 75 — The Electronic Communications Convention Implementation Act 
 Loi de mise en œuvre de la Convention sur les communications électroniques 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3549 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 3549 
 Bill No. 87 — The Data Matching Agreements Act 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3550 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 3550 
 Bill No. 92 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Amendment Act, 2017 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3550 
  Brkich (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 3551 
 Bill No. 93 — The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3551 
  Brkich (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 3552 
 Bill No. 101 — The Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3552 
  Brkich (referral to Economy Committee) ............................................................................................................................. 3554 
 Bill No. 102 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3554 
  Brkich (referral to Economy Committee) ............................................................................................................................. 3555 
 Bill No. 115 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3555 
 Bill No. 94 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3559 
 Bill No. 95 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3561 
 Bill No. 97 — The Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3564 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


