


















































May 28, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 65A  MONDAY, MAY 28, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4375 
 May 28, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 
the members of the House for the time here this morning. And it 
brings me great pleasure to introduce to you and through you to 
this legislature, a very special guest that is seated in your 
gallery. And with us today, Mr. Speaker, is Mrs. Abhilasha 
Joshi, the consul general of India in Vancouver, and Mr. Dinesh 
Mehta, the vice-consul of India.  
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the consul general’s first official visit to 
Saskatchewan, and we are pleased to welcome her to this great 
province. Consul Joshi is an experienced diplomat, Mr. 
Speaker, with more than 20 years of service, a distinguished 
career that includes postings in Portugal as well as in Brazil. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the consul general has a busy agenda during her 
visit here. She’s already met with the Minister of Agriculture, 
the Minister Responsible for Export and Trade, the Provincial 
Secretary, His Honour, and the Lieutenant Governor. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m looking forward to meeting with the consul 
general later this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan and India enjoy a very special 
relationship, a relationship that has many dimensions. The 
province of Saskatchewan is Canada’s top exporter to India, 
shipping about $1.1 billion worth of goods last year alone. 
Saskatchewan is India’s largest supplier of lentils and peas, as 
well as a major source of potash. And since 2015, uranium 
mined in northern Saskatchewan has contributed to India’s 
energy security and has helped India meet its climate change 
objectives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to our trade ties, Saskatchewan and 
India have a well-established educational partnership. Currently 
there are 23 agreements in place between our province’s 
post-secondary institutions and their counterparts in the nation 
of India. More than 1,000 students from India are currently 
studying in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
India has also made a major contribution to the remarkable 
population growth in our province over the past decade. We’ve 
welcomed more than 14,000 people from India since 2007 who 
currently make Saskatchewan home, and these newcomers have 

enriched and strengthened our province beyond measure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan and India have a thriving 
commercial partnership that stretches back decades, but more 
than that, we are good friends. Our friendship is getting deeper 
by the day, and it’s getting stronger each and every year. And 
today we are honoured that our good friend, Consul General 
Joshi, could visit our province, and we hope that she can return 
very soon. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this legislature to 
join me in welcoming these guests. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
with the Premier in saying welcome and namaskār to Mr. Mehta 
and Mrs. Joshi, and I guess a bem-vindo to Mrs. Joshi as well. 
Good to see you, and thank you very much for being here. And 
it’s a wonderful thing to be able to have this visit and to be able 
to celebrate the existing partnerships, this Indo-Canadian 
connection and Indo-Saskatchewan connection that is becoming 
stronger by the year. 
 
The Premier mentioned the important trade in lentils and 
chickpeas and in the mining sector as well and, of course, along 
with the economic connection, the growing cultural and 
community connection. I know members on this side, even in 
the past week, were at Hindu vegetarian suppers, iftar dinners, 
and Nagar Kirtan parades. So the way in which the 
Indo-Canadian community is contributing to the life of 
Saskatchewan is noticeable year after year, and I’d like to thank 
the members to join me in saying welcome and thank you for 
joining us today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you, I’d like to introduce several people 
seated in your gallery. First of all, Mr. Carlo Triolo, general 
manager of United Group in Saskatoon; and Shondra Boire, 
operations manager of Comfort Cabs — thanks for standing — 
both of whom are members of the Saskatchewan Taxi Cab 
Association. I want to thank them for coming down here today. 
 
And we look forward to continuing to work with the STCA 
[Saskatchewan Taxi Cab Association] to discuss possible ride 
share options for the province. I’ve met with STCA on a few 
occasions, as have some of my colleagues, and I want to thank 
them for their insight and for being part of the consultation 
process.  
 
I encourage all members to join me in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 
minister in welcoming Mr. Carlo and Ms. Boire to their 
Legislative Assembly, and for being here as part of the 
delegation today as we enter into committee on Bill No. 114. 
I’d like to thank them for their advocacy on behalf of their 
industry, and for their insight. And I would invite all members 



4376 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2018 

to join me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
request leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take 
a moment to introduce some honoured guests seated in your 
gallery this afternoon. They are victims services volunteer 
victim support workers. These are the volunteers who reach out 
with compassion when others are in crisis. 
 
We recognize the volunteers today as we mark Victims and 
Survivors of Crime Week. We thank them every day for the 
work that they dedicate and the time that they spend in helping 
people across our province. Today our honoured guests are 
celebrating some milestones: 10, 20, and 25 years doing what 
they do. 
 
With us today we have the 10-year recipients: Monica 
Pieczonka and Sheila Nicholson with Regina Victim Services, 
Marion MacDonald with Southeast Victim Services, Marie 
Hildebrandt and Gale Stonehouse with Battlefords Victim 
Services, Don Teniuk with Parkland Victim Services. 
 
The 20-year recipients are Margaret Minski with Battlefords 
Victim Services, Anita Klochko with Parkland Victim Services, 
Doug Haroldson with Southwest Victim Services. 
 
And finally the 25-year recipient is Gerry Peppler, who is a 
board member with Parkland Victim Services. 
 
There are currently 220 volunteer victim support workers 
whose selfless work makes Saskatchewan a better place to live 
and to be. In 2017-2018 volunteer victim support workers gave 
over 10,300 hours of their time to help 11,821 victims of crime 
and tragedy. 
 
I was honoured to have lunch and meet with our guests today 
and am grateful for the work that they do for us every day. So I 
would ask today, Mr. Speaker, that we join with me in 
welcoming all of these people to the legislature but, more 
importantly, to thank them for the work that they do without 
compensation. And it makes our province a truly great place to 
be. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the minister in welcoming these victim services volunteer 
victim support workers here in the legislature today. I’d like to 
thank them and all volunteer support workers for their selfless 
efforts in supporting victims through what is one of the most 

traumatic times in their life. 
 
Thank you so much for being here today, but also for all the 
work that you do. It’s very important work, and we should 
remember to thank you and all volunteers, not just on special 
days like today, but every day, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask all 
members to join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Stonebridge-Dakota. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce Bruce Bodine, who’s here today on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan Mining Association and Saskatchewan Mining 
Week. Accompanying Bruce is Tyler Hopson, manager of 
public affairs with Mosaic. 
 
Bruce is senior vice-president, potash for the Mosaic Company. 
He has contributed greatly to the Saskatchewan mining industry 
with his experience and professionalism. He began his career 
with Mosaic in 1999 as part of a predecessor company, holding 
leadership positions in engineering and plant management 
before taking on the role of vice-president, operations for 
Mosaic’s Esterhazy and Colonsay potash production facilities. 
Bruce also serves as director for the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce board of directors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me today in 
welcoming Bruce and Tyler to their Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s an honour to join with the minister to welcome 
Bruce Bodine and Tyler Hopson to their Assembly. Of course I 
thank them for their leadership of a very important company 
and industry within our province, Mosaic potash. I thank Bruce 
for his leadership of the Saskatchewan Mining Association. I 
had the privilege to join with other members on both sides of 
the Assembly for their Mining Week launch here today, as well 
as a luncheon with a speech from the president of the Canadian 
Mining Association. Certainly mining is incredibly important to 
this province, and I thank these members and their 
organizations for their leadership within our province. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for a 
couple of introductions. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for a couple 
of introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — I should have said extended. Excuse 
me, Mr. Speaker. 
 



May 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4377 

To you and all the members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure 
to introduce some special guests in the west gallery today. 
Joining us are several representatives from the Saskatchewan 
African Canadian Heritage Museum, often known by its 
acronym, SACHM. It is a charitable organization committed to 
strengthening multiculturalism as well as celebrating and 
preserving the history, heritage, and contributions of Canadians 
of African ancestry. With us today are Vice-Chair Winnifred 
Rogers, Carol LaFayette-Boyd, Reggie Newkirk, Blair Dixon, 
Barry Rogers, Allen Ssemmanda, and Christine Lwanga. I 
believe I got all of them. 
 
Our guests are here today to join me in recognizing a very 
unique book about a special man in Saskatchewan history. Dr. 
Alfred Schmitz Shadd was an early Saskatchewan pioneer who 
left his mark as a doctor, teacher, farmer, journalist, politician, 
and community member. He first came to what was 
Saskatchewan — or what was the North-West Territories, later 
became Saskatchewan — in 1896. He eventually got his doctor 
degree and set up a medical practice in the Melfort area, where 
he became an admired member of the community. 
 
In celebration of Dr. Shadd’s African ancestry, SACHM created 
a children’s book as a legacy project to honour Saskatchewan’s 
shared history and multicultural heritage. Li’l Shadd: A Story of 
Ujima gives young readers the opportunity to get to know one 
of the country’s first African-Canadian pioneers. The book was 
written by Alix Lwanga, is beautifully illustrated by Miriam 
Körner from Air Ronge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the story of Dr. Alfred Shadd is an important 
chapter of Saskatchewan history and in particular that of the 
Melfort area. People of African descent are a part of the 
founding figures of this province. Dr. Shadd made important 
contributions to our development around the turn of the century 
and as Saskatchewan became a province. 
 
The Ministry of Parks, Culture and Sport and the Government 
of Saskatchewan have purchased copies of the book, enough for 
every school in the province. Furthermore, thanks to the 
Ministry of Education, Li’l Shadd has been approved to be 
added to the curriculum for grades 1 to 5. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members join me in welcoming these 
guests to their Legislative Assembly, thanking them for their 
dedication and hard work, and saluting multiculturalism as one 
of our core values as a province today and into the future. 
 
And part two here, Mr. Speaker. Also in the west gallery, I’d 
like to introduce to all the members Mr. Jim Burnett, who is 
soon to retire from Sask Sport and Saskatchewan Lotteries after 
a 42-year career, including 36 years as the general manager. Jim 
is joined by his wife today, Kelly; his son Gord and his 
daughter Samantha; and two grandsons, Hunter and Jett, are 
here today. Thanks for being here. 
 
Jim began his career with Sask Sport as a marketing 
representative in 1976. Back then his job involved going door to 
door, visiting convenience stores and confectionaries to set 
them up as lottery retailers. He retired from general manager in 
2016 and has been working part-time with the corporation up 
until now. 
 

[13:45] 
 
He was quite an athlete in his younger days, I understand. He 
was inducted into the U of R [University of Regina] Hall of 
Fame in 2003 as an athlete. With more than three and a half 
decades under Jim’s leadership, Sask Sport has grown to be the 
recognized gold standard for amateur sport governance across 
the country. 
 
Jim was appointed to the board of governors of the Western 
Canada Lottery Corporation in 1984, and has served our 
province and the thousands of beneficiaries of the lottery 
system on this board since that day, including five terms as 
Chair of the board. Jim was also appointed as Saskatchewan 
representative to the Board of the Interprovincial Lottery 
Corporation in 1987. 
 
Jim is one of the major reasons, Mr. Speaker, our province has 
an enviable lottery-funded system for sport, culture, and 
recreation. As many members know, Saskatchewan lotteries is 
the main fundraiser for more than 12,000 sport, culture, and 
recreation groups that provide quality activities across our 
province. Volunteers remain the focus of the system and Jim 
has been instrumental in supporting the work of this vast 
network. Under Jim’s leadership, Sask Sport has benefited 
amateur sport across the province and has been a fantastic 
steward of the Lotteries Trust Fund. Throughout his career, Jim 
ensured Sask Sport stayed true to its vision, never wavering 
from the belief that sport is for everyone and it does make a 
difference in people’s lives. 
 
Thank you, Jim, for your amazing commitment to our province. 
I ask all members to help me congratulate Jim on a wonderful 
career and his enjoyable time in his retirement. Thank you for 
your service. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the minister on behalf of the official opposition in 
welcoming these two very important delegations to their 
Legislative Assembly. Certainly as a province who has the 
motto “from many peoples, strength” and who takes no small 
amount of pride in volunteerism, the way that people pitch in to 
make this province even better, Mr. Speaker, these two 
delegations are exemplars of that very tendency. 
 
Certainly with the Saskatchewan African-Canadian museum 
and the launch of Li’l Shadd and helping that story of Dr. Shadd 
to ring out throughout our schools and throughout our 
communities that it might be better known, is a wonderful 
initiative and certainly speaks to those values that we’ve 
touched on at the top there, Mr. Speaker. And certainly that that 
delegation is here with people like Carol LaFayette-Boyd and 
Reggie Newkirk and folks that have done so much for our 
province, it makes very good sense that they are here today to 
mark that introduction. 
 
And then as well, in terms of Jim Burnett, 42 years, Mr. 
Speaker — five terms with the Lottery Corporation, 42 years 
with Sask Sport. What a contribution that has been made by this 
individual to the province’s well-being, to the sporting life that 



4378 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2018 

is so important in so many ways, Mr. Speaker. So we’re very 
glad that he is here today to have that marked out. We’re very 
glad to see that he’s brought his family to witness this and that 
we might show him something of the appreciation that is there 
right across this province for the contribution that has been 
made by this individual. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again I’d like to join with the minister on 
behalf of the official opposition in welcoming these two very 
important delegations to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm River. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sitting in the 
west gallery are 10 grade 12 students, history class number 30. 
They’re accompanied by their teacher Victoria Danyluk and 
chaperone Sarah Chamberlain-Brown. I’m looking forward to 
meeting with you after session and I hope today we make a 
little bit of history for you. So to you and through you, I’d like 
to welcome them here to their legislature. Thank you for 
coming. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the rest of the Assembly I’d like to introduce 30 
grade 6 and 7 students from Pilot Butte School that are seated in 
the west gallery. Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to meet 
with them at about 10:30. They had some great questions. We 
tried to field as many of them as we possibly could. We ran . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ice cream. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Well, we gave them juice boxes. That 
should do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we ran out of time actually. They had so many 
questions but it was very enjoyable. I want to mention their 
teacher Gina Bradshaw which is no stranger in this House. 
She’s brought many a class, not necessarily Pilot Butte, but 
other schools to the legislature. She also attended the SSTI 
[Saskatchewan Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute on 
Parliamentary Democracy], teachers’ institute on parliamentary 
democracy, and that’s such a great program. Also 
accompanying her is teacher’s aid Marcia Sawchuk. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like all members to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to you 
and through you, I would also like to follow the member on 
introducing our daughter Gina Bradshaw to this legislature. 
Gina is quite the girl. She has wanted to be a schoolteacher right 
from when she was in grade 9, and lo and behold, she is. And I 
have to tell you a little bit, she really has the gift of the gab, but 
when she talks, she actually makes sense, far different than 
some of the other people in her family. But anyway, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like all members of this legislature to 
welcome Gina to her legislature. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition calling on the government to restore the 
Saskatchewan rental housing supplement. These citizens wish 
to bring to your attention that the Sask Party cut to the rental 
housing supplement shows more of the same from the Sask 
Party, whose cuts continually hurt the most vulnerable in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to immediately restore the 
Saskatchewan rental housing supplement, which was cut in 
the 2018-2019 budget. 

 
This particular petition is signed by individuals from Saskatoon, 
Mr. Speaker. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Francis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of 
Lloydminster, Paradise Hill, and St. Walburg. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise yet again today 
to present a petition calling for critical workplace supports for 
survivors of domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has 
the very dubious distinction of having the highest rates of 
domestic violence amongst all the provinces in this country, and 
we know that we should do so much more to protect survivors 
of domestic violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for many of those who experience domestic 
violence, that violence will follow them to their workplace, 
which is why the signatories to this petition are calling for five 
days of paid leave; seventeen weeks of unpaid leave should be 
made available to workers who are survivors of domestic 
violence; and that critical workplace supports made available to 
survivors of domestic violence should also be made available to 
workers living with PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder] as a 
result of domestic violence. 



May 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4379 

Mr. Speaker, this is what those who are on the front lines of this 
crisis are calling for. PATHS [Provincial Association of 
Transition Houses and Services of Saskatchewan] and the 
YWCA [Young Women’s Christian Association] of Regina are 
two such examples of organizations who see the benefit to 
ensuring that those who are fleeing situations of domestic 
violence are able to be able to maintain their employment while 
they transition to a more safer home environment. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, we saw a report tabled last week by this 
government. One of the recommendations in that government 
talked about ensuring supports for survivors of domestic 
violence in the workplace, ensuring that workplaces understand 
the importance of being able to recognize and support those 
who are experiencing domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, this is 
what we called for in a private member’s bill, Bill No. 609, the 
fourth time we’ve put forward these provisions in the last two 
years, Mr. Speaker. It’s time for this government to step up, do 
the right thing, and pass those provisions for these survivors. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to pass legislation to ensure 
critical supports in the workplace, including reasonable 
accommodation and paid and unpaid leave to survivors of 
domestic violence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today come 
from White City and Regina. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Saskatchewan Mining Week 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to recognize Saskatchewan Mining Week. Mining Week, 
which is organized by the Saskatchewan Mining Association, 
features events and activities throughout the province, 
showcasing various aspects of the mining sector. Sustaining 
Success is this year’s theme. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our mining industry employs over 30,000 people, 
directly and indirectly in the province, and produced 6.6 billion 
in mineral sales in 2017. The industry is one of the largest 
private-sector employers of indigenous people and is a major 
customer of indigenous-owned businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are working to keep our mining industry 
competitive by introducing the mineral development strategy. 
The mineral development strategy is designed to encourage the 
mining industry to conduct more exploration in Saskatchewan 
and specifically to take advantage of significant, unrealized 
base metals potential in Creighton and Denare Beach. Global 
competitiveness is extremely important and is vital to ensuring 
our mining industry remains the best in the world which, in 
turn, contributes to the quality of life we have in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the entire Assembly, I’d like to thank 
the Saskatchewan Mining Association and the mining 

companies operating in the province and the workers that make 
this, our industry, a success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Fire Fighters Union Celebrates 100th Anniversary 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
recognize the 100th anniversary of the Saskatoon Firefighters 
Union, the International Association of Fire Fighters Local 80. 
Although today is the official anniversary of Local 80’s 
affiliation with the IAFF [International Association of Fire 
Fighters], this past Saturday I had the pleasure to attend the 
celebration organized by our firefighters at TCU Place along 
with members from Saskatoon Centre, Churchill-Wildwood, 
University, and Westview. 
 
Local 80 was the second affiliated firefighters union in Canada, 
and for a hundred years they’ve been fighting for workers’ 
rights and safety and contributing much to Saskatoon by way of 
their community involvement. The men who worked at the fire 
hall in 1918 had unregulated working hours and conditions, 
inadequate personal safety equipment, and were basically living 
at the fire hall. That voice isn’t entirely there yet, Mr. Speaker. 
In the early days, the firefighters even required permission to go 
home to spend time with their families, but by working together 
they’ve been able to secure safer working conditions on 
everything from respirators to mental health supports.  
 
But there is still a strong need for their local to fight for the 
rights of their members who keep us all safe. And I know that 
the men and women of IAFF Local 80 will continue for the next 
hundred years to advance workers’ rights, fight for fairness, and 
keep up their commitment to community. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating IAFF Local 80 
on a hundred years of excellence and in thanking all firefighters 
for the difficult job they do. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 

Fewer Impaired Driving Deaths in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Hindley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Thursday my 
colleague, the member from Prince Albert Carlton, announced 
that there were 40 per cent fewer deaths involving drugs or 
alcohol on Saskatchewan roads in 2017. The numbers indicate 
that there were 39 deaths last year, and while this is certainly an 
improvement, impaired driving remains a concern in this 
province and a focus of this government. One death due to 
impaired driving is still one death too many. 
 
SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] has done a 
phenomenal job of increasing awareness of the problem with 
their People Shouldn’t Disappear campaign. This has been one 
of their most powerful campaigns to date. It features families, 
friends, and those who have lost their lives because of impaired 
driving. We just cannot imagine the pain of the families who 
have lost someone to impaired driving, but through their pain 
they’re trying to make a difference. 
 
We would also like to thank MADD [Mothers Against Drunk 



4380 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2018 

Driving] Canada for their continuous support in the fight to end 
impaired driving. Patricia Hynes-Coates, president of MADD 
Canada, stated that “The significant decline in impaired driving 
deaths in Saskatchewan is a powerful illustration of the impact 
of strong laws and effective, ongoing awareness efforts.” We 
agree and that is why we will continue with our work. 
 
Thank you again to the families, SGI, and MADD Canada for 
helping to change the culture of impaired driving in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert Fine Arts Festival  
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 16th I 
was pleased to attend the Prince Albert Grand Council 27th 
annual Fine Arts Festival held at Senator Allen Bird Memorial 
Centre in Prince Albert and was honoured to be one of the 
people invited to take part in the grand entry. 
 
The Fine Arts Festival is an exciting event with participants 
from all the Prince Albert Grand Council schools across 
northern Saskatchewan. The number of participants and 
chaperones is over 1,800 and it grows every year. The 
competitions include drama, oratory, music, and dance in 
different age categories. There are powwow exhibitions, a trade 
show, and each day of the event brings an early morning pipe 
ceremony. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an excellent opportunity for First Nations 
students to take part in the fine arts, which helps them develop 
the confidence and knowledge to pursue other goals. Our 
children have so much talent and creativity, and it is all on 
display at this fine arts festival. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
congratulating the participants of the Prince Albert Grand 
Council 27th annual Fine Arts Festival, their families and 
chaperones, and to commend the Prince Albert Grand Council 
for sponsoring and hosting this event every year. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

Nagar Kirtan in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this weekend I, along with the Minister of Education and the 
member from Saskatoon University, had the pleasure to 
participate in the Sikh Day parade in Saskatoon. This event, 
also called Nagar Kirtan, was held as part of the Vaisakhi 
religious celebration, and there was an open invitation to the 
entire city to come and enjoy the festivities. 
 
Thousands of people came out to participate in the colourful 
festivities, which included free food, turban wrapping, and 
traditional demonstrations, among other activities. A number of 
other dignitaries were also in attendance, including 
Saskatchewan Lieutenant Governor, the Honourable Tom 

Molloy; Saskatoon Mayor Charlie Clark; and federal Minister 
of Infrastructure and Communities Amarjeet Sohi. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2007, 108,000 newcomers have arrived in 
Saskatchewan, a 480 per cent increase since the 10-year period 
prior. A large portion of these new arrivals, 14,738 people came 
from India.  
 
Mr. Speaker, diversity is and will continue to be crucial to our 
province’s future, and opportunities to celebrate it are always 
important. These events make our communities a more 
harmonious and interesting place to live and grow together. I 
ask all members to join in this Assembly in congratulating the 
Sikh Society on this wonderful community celebration. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Saskatoon City Hospital Foundation Fundraiser  
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday afternoon I had the opportunity to bring greetings on 
behalf of our government to the City Hospital Foundation 
fundraiser with special guest Mr. Wendel Clark. The event was 
held at Preston Park Retirement Residence in my constituency 
of Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood.  
 
I always enjoy an opportunity to reconnect with the friends I’ve 
made at Preston Park I and II. It’s important for us to 
acknowledge and appreciate the lifetime of work our seniors, 
such as the wonderful men and women at Preston Park, have 
done to make this province such a great place to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was an honour to welcome Wendel Clark back 
home to Saskatchewan as well. Wendel has had an impressive 
NHL [National Hockey League] career, and he has shown his 
commitment to this province through his ongoing efforts to give 
back. This event was no exception, Mr. Speaker. Wendel took 
the time to share some of his hockey experiences and participate 
in a lively question and answer session. The large crowd 
enjoyed watching Wendel take shots on goal, all to raise funds 
for Saskatoon City Hospital Foundation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank Wendel Clark for taking the time 
to attend this event and visit with Preston Park residents and 
guests. And I would also like to thank everyone who attended 
for their support and for the funds raised for the City Hospital 
Foundation. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

100th Memorial Cup 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the 100th Mastercard Memorial Cup has officially 
come to a close. Last night the QMJHL [Quebec Major Junior 
Hockey League] champions Acadie-Bathurst Titan took on our 
home team, the Regina Pats, to a sold-out crowd at the Brandt 
Centre. After three periods of fast-paced hockey action, the 
Titan were victorious, earning the right to raise the Memorial 
Cup for the 100th time. Mr. Speaker, the final score was 3-0 for 



May 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4381 

the Titan. 
 
This event was about more than just hockey, Mr. Speaker. 
Dedicated volunteers were recognized, Canadian history and 
our military was celebrated, and past hockey legends were 
honoured. Throughout the weekend, there were well over 70 
Pats alumni in attendance, including fan favourites like Ed 
Staniowski and Jordan Eberle. Mr. Speaker, before the last 
game, hockey legend Freddie Sasakamoose, the first 
treaty-status First Nations player to lace up the skates in the 
NHL [National Hockey League] was honoured. The Regina 
Pats were also honoured to bring their goalie, Jacob 
Wassermann, to a game, who was a member of the Humboldt 
Broncos team and was involved in that fatal bus crash. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate Pats captain Sam Steel on 
being awarded the Stafford Smythe Memorial Trophy as the 
most valuable player, leading the tournament in scoring with 13 
points. Sam has been an incredible leader and a role model for 
so many young players here in Saskatchewan, and we wish him 
the best in his career as he continues on to the NHL. 
 
I’d now ask all members to please join me in congratulating the 
100th Mastercard Memorial Cup host committee, the Regina 
Pats staff and players, the CHL [Canadian Hockey League], and 
all the dedicated volunteers for putting on this historic event. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Suicide Prevention for First Nations People 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In Alberta today, 
Premier Notley is doing the right thing and apologizing for the 
Alberta government’s role in the Sixties Scoop. Here in 
Saskatchewan on Thursday, the Federation of Sovereign 
Indigenous Nations released their Saskatchewan First Nations 
suicide prevention strategy. They opened that document with a 
quote from a research participant in La Ronge, that reads: 
“We’ve become experts in dealing with crises. Now we have to 
become experts in preventing crises from happening.” 
 
First Nations leadership are experts in the needs of their 
communities, and I want to thank the FSIN [Federation of 
Sovereign Indigenous Nations] for their care, attention, and 
work that went into creating a document that really addresses 
the unique needs of First Nations communities when it comes to 
preventing suicide. The stated goal of the strategy is to achieve 
equality of health outcomes between First Nations and non-First 
People, and to lower the death by suicide of First Nations 
people to that of non-First People in the province. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, this is a laudable goal and something 
that both sides of the House can agree on as a much-needed 
priority. So my question today is, will this government join us 
in full support of this strategy and commit today to providing 
the funding and support necessary for FSIN to implement this 
strategy in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
thank the member opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to the apology today, that’ll be forthcoming from our 
understanding from the province of Alberta to those Sixties 
Scoop survivors, Mr. Speaker. We commend the province of 
Alberta and we, in this province, have also committed to 
apologizing, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve been engaging with 
survivors and leadership, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that that 
apology is fulsome, Mr. Speaker, and is an apology that is 
worked on with all sides of the table, Mr. Speaker, and we look 
forward to that apology forthcoming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the First Nation or the FSIN 
suicide prevention strategy, Mr. Speaker, first and foremost our 
hearts go out to anyone in this province, any family in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, that has lost a loved one, has lost a 
member of their community, Mr. Speaker, or in any way has 
been affected by suicide, Mr. Speaker. Our government also 
appreciates the effort and the conversation and the goals that are 
being put forward and the strategy that is being put forward by 
FSIN, Mr. Speaker, and our ministries: the Ministry of Health, 
Ministry of Social Services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ll be reaching out. We’ll be working with the FSIN where 
our targets and our strategies align, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll be 
working very closely where the opportunity presents itself, Mr. 
Speaker, with the FSIN and with other organizations across the 
province of Saskatchewan as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, this strategy was created in 
response to the lack of action from both the federal and 
provincial governments in response to the suicide crises. 
Despite continuously high rates of suicide in indigenous 
communities, this government has failed to prioritize the 
development of a suicide prevention strategy. 
 
The FSIN identified in their report a need for better leadership 
at the provincial level. This government has continued to 
underserve First Nations and Métis communities, ignore the 
high rates of suicide, underfund programs that provide mental 
health supports for Métis and First Nations people, and 
continues to fail to address the ongoing history of systemic 
racism that really deserves the attention that is long overdue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to take ownership over this ongoing crisis 
and show real leadership in preventing suicide in Saskatchewan. 
However, the FSIN strategy also noted that Saskatchewan has 
no provincial suicide prevention strategy and apparently no 
plans to develop one. 
 
Will this government take the lead from the FSIN, finally take 
the alarming rates of suicide in Saskatchewan seriously, 
acknowledge the work to be done, and commit today to the 
adoption, expansion, and implementation of such a strategy for 
the entire province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And as 
I said, we will work closely with the FSIN and other 
organizations across the province, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that 



4382 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2018 

the strategies that we put in place, Mr. Speaker, in our 
communities, whether they be Aboriginal communities or not, 
Mr. Speaker, are consistent across the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ll be looking, as I said, from ministries within the 
Government of Saskatchewan at the FSIN’s recommendations, 
Mr. Speaker. And we’ll be looking to align any opportunities 
that we have, Mr. Speaker, with the recommendations that have 
been put forward by the FSIN, Mr. Speaker, with those ongoing 
efforts to help reduce the risk of suicide, Mr. Speaker, in 
communities across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ll continue to work with all of the partners in our province, 
Mr. Speaker, including the FSIN, to ensure that we can help 
address, Mr. Speaker, in an increased fashion, the mental health 
needs of all Saskatchewan residents, Mr. Speaker, in all 
communities. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We need immediate 
action on this problem. One more death by suicide in this 
province is too many. And that action starts with a commitment 
today to a prevention strategy for the province, and committing 
to sharing clearly the data that exists. 
 
In May, the Minister of Health tabled statistics showing 1,432 
deaths by suicide in Saskatchewan between 2005 and 2016, 
with 265 of those being First Nations people. However, the 
Office of the Chief Coroner counted 110 more suicides than 
reported from the ministry and 40 per cent higher First Nations 
deaths by suicide. FSIN also noted that there appears to be very 
little available data on the rates and patterns of suicide attempts 
by indigenous people in Saskatchewan, and ask that the 
Ministry of Health commit to recording and sharing detailed 
data of suicide and suicide attempts in the province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, can this government explain the discrepancies 
between the minister’s numbers and those of the Chief 
Coroner’s office? Will this government commit to providing the 
necessary resources to the Office of the Chief Coroner and the 
Saskatchewan First Nations suicide prevention secretariat to fill 
the data gaps and work towards equity on health outcomes 
between First Nations people and non-First Peoples in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, to the specific question 
from the Leader of the Opposition, we’ll look into the 
discrepancies that he may be outlining between ministry 
numbers and the coroner’s numbers, Mr. Speaker. But I must 
point out that there has been a lot of action taken by this 
government over the last number of years when it comes to 
suicide, northern suicide, and in fact mental health supports and 
suicide supports for people throughout the province suffering 
from the loss to suicide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know it’s a terrible loss when anybody loses 
their life before their time, specifically somebody in youth, Mr. 
Speaker. But we do know that although it’s not a stopgap, a 

significant initiative, but 811 is something that is very useful 
when it comes to someone that’s feeling suicidal or having 
mental health struggles for a first point of contact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I’ve talked about in the House previously we do fund 
the Saskatchewan Health Authority to provide mental health 
supports throughout the province, whether it’s through 
psychotherapists, whether it’s through psychiatrists, whether 
it’s through mental health first aid or other different supports, 
Mr. Speaker. And as we’ve committed to as well, with the 
report from the Children’s Advocate looking through and 
looking at delivering mental health supports in schools, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re going to continue this work and support the 
people in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government Response to Opioid Crisis 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Suicide prevention 
strategies around the country and around the world have shown 
significant impact on decreasing the number of people who 
attempt or complete suicide. It’s something that’s much needed 
in this province and needed for action to move forward on 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment to acknowledge Marie 
Agioritis who’s here today with us in the west gallery. Marie 
and her family suffered an unimaginable loss in 2015 when her 
young son died of an accidental fentanyl overdose. This tragedy 
is a story that is becoming all too common in our province. Yet 
this government has done almost nothing to address the issue. 
 
They announced a provincial task force to address fentanyl and 
opioid deaths over a year ago, yet we’ve heard nothing further 
from this task force — no reports, no recommendations. 
Apparently there are no people whose families have been 
impacted by drug use on the committee, and the Minister of 
Health has said they’ll continue to watch and react, instead of 
doing the work to get ahead of the crisis and prevent further 
deaths.  
 
The government made no mention of the crisis in the 2018 
budget. And while this side of the House certainly welcomes 
the expanded access to naloxone, the fact remains that this 
government continues to prove that it is reactive rather than 
proactive in this ongoing and increasing crisis. 
 
So I ask, Mr. Speaker, does this government have a plan to 
address the rising number of overdoses from fentanyl and other 
opioids, or is it simply waiting for the next tragedy to strike 
before it will take any action? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
sympathy to Marie and to her family on their tragic loss. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Leader of the Opposition’s specific 
questions, obviously we take this issue very seriously. We’ve 
made a number of changes. We’ve made naloxone kits far 



May 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4383 

easier for people to access, including making them free for 
families or for people who think they may be in a situation 
where they’re likely to witness an overdose, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve just declassified naloxone to make it even more 
available, Mr. Speaker. We’ll continue to look at ways to 
prevent these tragedies. 
 
The member opposite referenced the committee, the work that 
was done, Mr. Speaker. For full disclosure, he asked some 
questions of one of the committee members in estimates last 
week, Mr. Speaker, one of the Health staff members that 
co-chairs that committee. The committee’s about improving 
communications between Health and Justice and other 
ministries that are dealing with this crisis, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
continuing to expand their work. And on subsequent questions, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d be prepared to elaborate on that. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A harm reduction 
approach decreases overdoses, prevents transmission of HIV 
[human immunodeficiency virus] and hepatitis C, and connects 
people battling addictions to treatment. During the Sask Party 
leadership race, the Premier was asked by the Leader-Post 
whether . . . I’ll quote the question: “Do you support needle 
exchange programs and/or safe injection sites for drug users?” 
He responded, “No. The province will continue to provide 
current services for people who are suffering with substance 
abuse.” 
 
Now this statement not only tells us that the Premier continues 
to conflate substance abuse with addiction — a potentially 
dangerous perspective that places blame on people suffering 
from trauma and underlying mental illness — but also that the 
Premier is not aware of the breadth of services already available 
for people with addictions in Saskatchewan where needle 
exchange programs are a part of the programs that exist. Nor 
does he appear to recognize the value of life-saving harm 
reduction programming in our province. 
 
Now this government has continued to ignore the research and 
the evidence of the success of harm reduction in supporting 
people with addictions. So my question to the Premier: since 
he’s taken this new role, has he done his homework on this file? 
And will he support a harm reduction approach, looking at all 
of the options to battle addictions and provide real and effective 
avenues to safe, compassionate treatment for people with 
addictions? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll ignore the sarcastic 
approach to a very serious conversation, Mr. Speaker, that 
needs to be had. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the opioid crisis, certainly as I mentioned 
we’ve taken an approach to make naloxone more available, Mr. 
Speaker. We continue to watch what Alberta and BC [British 
Columbia] are doing because unfortunately they’ve been far 
greater impacted than we have on this, Mr. Speaker. But even 
one death is too many, Mr. Speaker, so obviously we take this 
issue very seriously, and we do fund some harm reduction sites 

as the member opposite knows. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re extremely concerned about this. We’re 
going to watch for best practices in neighbouring provinces. 
The committee’s going to continue to do their work to improve 
communications between the different ministries. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re very concerned. We’re going to continue with the work. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, this is an extremely serious topic 
and a serious question posed to the Premier. His words stated 
that he was opposed to needle exchange and opposed to safe 
injection sites, which to my mind really begs a very serious 
question: does he understand harm reduction? Does he 
understand its importance in decreasing HIV and hepatitis C 
transmission; its importance in preventing the overdoses that 
need to be addressed in this province; its importance in 
connecting people to the addictions treatments they need to get 
off drugs? Does he support harm reduction or is he against it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite knows 
safe injection sites . . . There’s conflicting opinions on that, Mr. 
Speaker, but for harm reduction, Mr. Speaker, we very clearly 
are supportive of that. We’ve been funding harm reduction 
sites, Mr. Speaker, for some time now. We collect used needles 
and distribute clean needles, Mr. Speaker. The member opposite 
knows that. He’s trying to take a very serious topic and drive a 
wedge on this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, I would just like to offer my sympathy to Marie and her 
family. If she’d like to meet after question period, Mr. Speaker, 
I would be pleased to do that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Strategies to Address Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the Domestic Violence Death 
Review Report was released last week. The report made 19 
recommendations that would help prevent domestic violence 
and support survivors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the report recommended that these reviews occur 
regularly like they do in other provinces. But the minister 
wouldn’t provide a commitment to ensure this happens, just like 
the minister wouldn’t commit funding to ensure the other 
recommendations were successfully implemented. They say 
they support this report and its recommendations but the Sask 
Party government has shown no commitment to act upon them. 
Will the minister commit today to ensure that reviews continue, 
and that the necessary dollars will be provided to implement the 
recommendations? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 
opposite for the question. With regard to reviewing on an 
ongoing basis, of course that’s necessary and it’s essential. This 



4384 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2018 

was a report that was done by a large group of people who are 
otherwise engaged in very good work across the province. I 
don’t want to see those people have to spend their time on an 
ongoing method of dealing with the statistics or the analysis 
that takes place. The groundwork that they have laid sets a path 
forward with regard to what we need to do with maintaining 
stats. And obviously that has to be done, should be done, by 
people within the ministry, perhaps reach out to some of these 
same people again. 
 
So of course the answer is yes, we need to maintain and 
continue logging, cataloguing what we hope is a diminishing 
number of people that are affected by this. 
 
With regard to the other issues that she raised with regard to our 
commitment to the report, we indicated our acceptance of all 
the recommendations in the report. Some of the 
recommendations deal with on-reserve things, require work 
with the federal government. We also have issues to work with 
across several ministries, and we will continue that work, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, we need more than words; we 
need action. Saskatchewan has the highest rates of domestic 
violence. But Saskatchewan also has the second-highest rates of 
sexual assaults. Those working in these areas will tell you that 
Saskatchewan needs both a sexual assault strategy and a 
domestic violence strategy. Mr. Speaker, both are necessary and 
both are needed. 
 
Can the minister commit to both a sexual assault strategy and a 
comprehensive domestic violence strategy that includes the 
recommendations from the death review report? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Yes. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, this spring the Premier walked back 
his promise to properly fund education. Some divisions have 
received cuts while others have received near or status quo 
funding. To remind everyone, the status quo includes that 
$54 million cut from last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the boards that received almost status quo 
budgets have significantly more students this year. With more 
students and essentially the same funding, it doesn’t take a lot 
of math skills to figure out that these cuts will find their way to 
the classroom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last two years there are 2,700 more students 
across the province — 1,200 more students in Saskatoon 
divisions alone. Can the minister admit that, with thousands 
more students and nearly status quo funding, there will be 
further cuts to our children’s classrooms? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll do nothing of the kind. Mr. Speaker, in this budget 
this year, our government has committed to an additional 
$30 million in school funding, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
annualized funding of the seven and a half million dollars that 
our Premier announced in the rotunda of this very building, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’re going to continue to have conversations, Mr. Speaker, 
with school boards. I’ve already indicated, not only on the floor 
of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to the STF [Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation] and the SSBA [Saskatchewan School 
Boards Association], that we’ll look at the enrolment 
projections as we start having ongoing conversations, Mr. 
Speaker, with developing budgets. We’re going to have those 
conversations. But this government is committed to making 
sure that we provide the proper funding to classrooms, Mr. 
Speaker, so that our children of this province can get the proper 
education. We’re committed to that, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll 
continue to do that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, boards around this province are 
currently in the process of finalizing their budget submissions 
and it will be readily apparent very soon just how inadequate 
that partial backfill of those cuts really will be. 
 
Last year school boards all across the province had huge cuts 
and shortfalls. And with barely above status quo funding from 
the Sask Party government, they will have shortfalls again this 
year. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan school divisions are looking 
at their books and many know that they don’t have what they 
need to support the growing number of students. Student ratios 
will go up and more programs could be cut. 
 
So has the minister heard from school boards about the 
shortfalls that they are facing and the cuts that they’ll have to 
make to classrooms when kids go back to school this fall? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the member’s 
a former school board trustee. And she would know, if she’s 
talked to the Regina Public School Board, Mr. Speaker, that her 
former school board hired thirty-two and a half FTEs [full-time 
equivalent], based on the seven and a half million dollar in-year 
commitment that we made which annualized to $30 million, 
Mr. Speaker. Other school divisions have hired FTEs as well in 
support of classrooms, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I say, we’re going to continue to have those conversations, 
but I can tell you one thing we’re not going to do, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re not going to burden those children in the classroom with 
two and a half billion dollars worth of annual operating debt 
which had been proposed, Mr. Speaker, by the Leader of the 
Opposition, only to have it paid down, Mr. Speaker, by using a 
carbon tax. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 



May 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4385 

Global Transportation Hub and Land Transactions 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The west Regina 
bypass agreement signed in March of 2014 contains some 
astonishing payments from the Ministry of Highways to the 
GTH [Global Transportation Hub] for borrow land or dirt, as 
well as the right-of-way for the actual west bypass. 
 
Ironically or perhaps deliberately, the total deal adds up to the 
same price that the GTH paid to Anthony Marquart for the 
infamous east parcels, which was well above the appraised 
value. After four years of waiting to see if the dirt was good 
enough, the west Regina bypass agreement was cancelled in 
March of this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week the Minister of Highways displayed a 
shocking lack of knowledge about this multi-million-dollar dirt 
deal at the GTH. When asked if Highways knew before it went 
and purchased these borrow pits, the minister deflected and 
said, “You would have to ask the previous minister. I wouldn’t 
know the dates and details.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I hope he’s had a chance to swivel his chair 
around and ask the former minister, the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone, how they came up with this wonky deal. In 
order for the public to find out how that ill-conceived deal was 
structured, will he arrange to have the former minister appear 
before a committee for questioning? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we went on with this at 
some length last week about the fact that I’m not in the dirt 
business. And, Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite want to 
spend time in the dirt, I don’t object to where they want to 
spend their time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our goal with the Global Transportation Hub is to 
move it forward, to find some tenants that want to occupy the 
property, to finish the Regina bypass which will tie directly into 
it, to look at where we do with railway connections to it, and to 
look at employing even more people that will move into the 
Global Transportation Hub. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite know full well that there’s 
investigation under way. We have absolutely no control over 
what takes place with the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police], with the prosecutors in Manitoba. Those are things we 
ought not have any involvement in and, Mr. Speaker, we’re not 
going to. So if they want to go back and review . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well the member opposite said, what’s our 
point? Well the point is they’re asking questions about it and 
we’re saying, those are things we can’t answer. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice knows 
full well that the questions I’m asking today have nothing to do 
with the investigation he’s referring to. But perhaps the member 
from Martensville could shed some light on this unusual 
multi-million-dollar dirt deal. 
 

Now an interesting part of the 2014 deal is found in sections 11 
and 12 where Highways paid in advance an additional down 
payment of 3.6 million to the GTH for stockpiling and hauling 
dirt on the main GTH footprint. Now this is weird because it’s 
the same land that they are now busy trying to sell for $250,000 
an acre. Now Brightenview bought some of that land last year 
— 10 acres with a promise to buy 20 acres more. 
 
Last week in media scrums the minister didn’t answer the 
question about the additional $3.6 million down payment on the 
Brightenview land. He was very clear though; he said the GTH 
would pay back the money for the unused borrow as that land is 
sold to others. So my question to the Minister of Highways, did 
the GTH return the sale price of the Brightenview land back to 
Highways, since it obviously isn’t being used for stockpiling 
dirt? 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member opposite for the question. As I said last week, the 
borrow pit was purchased from the Ministry of Highways, 
access to that land, if they needed the borrow material. It was 
then offered to the partners once the tender was awarded and 
the partners said, at that time, their borrow pits had better 
material in it and they didn’t expect that kind of product when 
they got into their borrow pits. So they didn’t need that product, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This was a major project. There was over 17 trillion cubic 
metres of product that was going to be needed to build the 
bypass, which was huge, Mr. Speaker. This was all in regards to 
that. And as a result, with not using that borrow material, Mr. 
Speaker, the agreement was signed with the Global 
Transportation Hub and the Ministry of Highways that once that 
land was sold, that price would be paid back to the Ministry of 
Highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs  
and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 73, The Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and the bill be now read 
the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 73, The 



4386 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2018 

Insurance Amendment Act, 2017, that the bill be now read a 
third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 73 — The Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the minister that Bill No. 
73, The Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs  
and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 99, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2), a 
bilingual bill, with amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill, and that the bill and its 
amendments be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 99, The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2), and that the bill 
and its amendments be now read the third time. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 
time? 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 99 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 
(No. 2)/Loi modificative no 2 de 2017 sur l’interprétation 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that the amendments be now 
read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First and second reading of the 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 99 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 
(No. 2)/Loi modificative no 2 de 2017 sur l’interprétation 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 99, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2) be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a distinct privilege to be able to 
stand and speak to this bill today. I’d like to start by recognizing 
the people of Saskatchewan who made this important day 
possible. Over the last two years, people across the province 
have come together to fight this government’s privatization 
agenda. 
 
Saskatchewan people knew from the beginning that Bill 40 was 
about one thing and one thing only: giving this government the 
ability to sell off our Crowns without any mandate to do so. 
This full repeal of Bill 40 that we’re voting on today is a victory 
that was fought for by Saskatchewan people. The public 
response to this privatization law is something that we haven’t 
seen in this province for many years: petition drives, rallies, 
phone bees, letters day after day to members on both sides of 
the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to travel to all corners of 
the province since this legislation was introduced, and when it 
came to Bill 40 and its partial repeal, Saskatchewan people, 
whatever their political stripe, felt betrayed — and rightly so, 
Mr. Speaker, because in the 2007, 2011, and 2016 elections, the 
Sask Party told us very clearly that we had nothing to worry 
about. They told us that our Crowns were in safe hands and that 



May 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4387 

there would be no sell-off whatsoever. 
 
But then — surprise — in the fall of 2016 we saw Bill 40 
which, through a backdoor amendment to The Interpretation 
Act and some linguistic gymnastics, changed the definition of 
privatization and allowed for the sale of up to 49 per cent of any 
of our Crown corporations. It was another broken promise from 
this government. 
 
The people of our province rose up and they made it clear that 
by selling our Crowns, that by selling our Crowns this 
government would be taking away something that gives 
strength to the people of Saskatchewan. They spoke up and they 
made their voices heard. 
 
So today’s victory is a victory for the people of this province. It 
is all of our victory. It’s a victory that comes because this 
government finally saw the light, which we’re thankful for. But 
it never should have come to this. Our Crown corporations 
belong to the people of Saskatchewan. They were set up by and 
for us to serve the public interest, not private interests. They 
send hundreds of millions of dollars in dividends to provincial 
coffers to pay for schools, hospitals, and highways. They create 
good-paying jobs in communities in every corner of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But shamefully, it’s too late for some of our Crowns. ISC 
[Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan] and 40 
SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] stores 
have already been sold off under Sask Party’s watch. They 
muse publicly about selling SaskTel on the open market. And 
STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company], our provincial 
transportation company that connected our province, a lifeline 
for so many communities, was scrapped and sold off using the 
wind-down provision of Bill 40. 
 
So it’s too late for that decision, that terrible decision with 
which this government plowed ahead to eliminate this valuable 
public service that connected Saskatchewan people from 
Meadow Lake to Maple Creek, providing independence to our 
seniors, getting patients the access to the care they need, and 
connected families to loved ones. In this session we heard from 
people with disabilities who came into this House to tell us the 
way that they feel trapped in their communities, the way that 
their independence has been taken away. 
 
But to this day the government admits they did no research, no 
economic impact analysis on what the full costs of selling off 
STC would be. Well it may be too late to stop those sell-offs 
that the Sask Party has already rushed ahead with, but it’s not 
too late to commit to undoing the damage they’ve done. Rest 
assured, New Democrats will build back a transportation 
network that reconnects our province once again. 
 
So while we’re glad, we’re glad, we’re relieved to see this full 
repeal of Bill 40, we’re under no illusions that this is over. 
We’re in no way filled with confidence that this Sask Party can 
be trusted with our Crowns. We know they’re going to keep 
trying to contract out, carve off everything they can, sell off any 
parts of these Crowns that aren’t nailed down. We know it was 
no accident that SLGA was removed from the Crown protection 
Act. And they haven’t said yet — they haven’t said, they 
haven’t been open yet — about whether they think they can 

wind down any of our other Crowns without Bill 40. But 
whatever they try to do, New Democrats will be there. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — A little order on this side of the House, please 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well it says the debate in a bill. 
But I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And yes, you’re 
missing something, the members over there were asking. 
You’re missing a commitment from New Democrats, a 
commitment from New Democrats that, whatever happens, we 
will be on the job, Mr. Speaker, every step of the way. We’ll be 
standing with Saskatchewan people to stand up for our Crowns 
and the people who rely on them. And I hope, Mr. Speaker, that 
those members are listening and that this government has 
learned its lesson when it comes to privatization, that it’s 
learned that anything less than full public ownership of our 
Crowns is a sell-off, that we won’t be back here any time soon 
debating laws that look to sell off our Crowns. 
 
That’s what I hope, because that’s what’s good for 
Saskatchewan people and that’s what Saskatchewan people 
want. New Democrats will always stand up to protect our 
Crown corporations. We’re going to be happy to support this 
amended bill to fully, finally repeal Bill 40. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, I look forward to the vote and to finally getting rid of 
this terrible legislation of Bill 40. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 14:40 until 14:43.] 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour of the motion, please 
stand. 
 

[Yeas — 55] 
 
Moe Beaudry-Mellor Merriman 
Stewart Reiter Wyant 
Morgan Harpauer Duncan 
Marit Hargrave D’Autremont 
Cox Makowsky Tell 
Eyre Brkich Harrison 
Ottenbreit Cheveldayoff Weekes 
Hart Kirsch Bradshaw 
Fiaz Ross Carr 
Lawrence Young Wilson 
McMorris Michelson Bonk 
Doke Steinley Hindley 
Buckingham Lambert Dennis 



4388 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2018 

Nerlien Steele Goudy 
Olauson Francis Meili 
Vermette Wotherspoon Beck 
Sproule Rancourt Mowat 
Sarauer McCall Belanger 
Chartier   
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed to the motion. 
 

[Nays — nil] 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the third reading 
motion, 55; those opposed, nil. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — Third reading of this Bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs  
and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 103, The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and the bill be now read 
the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 103, The 
Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 and that the bill be now 
read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 103 — The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It was moved by the minister that Bill No. 
103, The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 be now read the 

third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs  
and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 106, The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death 
Amendment Act, 2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and the bill be now read 
the third the time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 106, The 
Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 
2017 and that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 106 — The Missing Persons and Presumption  
of Death Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 106, The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 



May 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4389 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs  
and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 111, The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment 
Act, 2017 without amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry. I read that through rather quickly. It’s 
“with amendment.” 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill and its 
amendments be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 
No. 111, The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 
2017 and that the bill and its amendments be now read a third 
time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a first 
time? 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 111 — The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I move that the amendments be now read 
a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the amendments be now read a first and second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First and second reading of the 
amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader may proceed 
to move third reading. 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 111 — The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I move that the bill now be read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 111, The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs  
and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll get it right this 
time. Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing Committee 
on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 113, 
The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 
No. 113, The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017 
and that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader may proceed 
to move third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 113 — The Planning and Development  
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I move that the bill be now read the third 



4390 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2018 

time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that Bill No. 113, The Planning and Development 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report that it has 
considered certain estimates and to present its sixth report. I 
move: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Human 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on Human 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. Oh, written questions. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 294 through 300. 
 
The Speaker: — Tabled 294 to 300. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, so our committees may 
continue their good work, I move that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the Assembly be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I move that this Assembly be now adjourned 
until 1:30 tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:53.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4375 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4375 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4375 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4375 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4376 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4376 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4376 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4376 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 4376 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4377 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4378 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4378 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4378 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4378 
  Francis ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4378 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4378 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Mining Week 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4379 
 Fire Fighters Union Celebrates 100th Anniversary 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4379 
 Fewer Impaired Driving Deaths in Saskatchewan 
  Hindley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4379 
 Prince Albert Fine Arts Festival  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4380 
 Nagar Kirtan in Saskatoon 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4380 
 Saskatoon City Hospital Foundation Fundraiser  
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4380 
 100th Memorial Cup 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4380 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Suicide Prevention for First Nations People 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4381 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4381 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4382 
 Government Response to Opioid Crisis 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4382 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4382 
 Strategies to Address Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4383 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4383 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4384 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4384 
 Global Transportation Hub and Land Transactions 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4385 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4385 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4385 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4385 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4390 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 99 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2)/Loi modificative no 2 de 2017 sur l’interprétation 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4386 
 Bill No. 111 — The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4389 
 



 

THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 73 — The Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4386 
 Bill No. 99 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2)/Loi modificative no 2 de 2017 sur l’interprétation 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4386 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4386 
 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 4387 
 Bill No. 103 — The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4388 
 Bill No. 106 — The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4388 
 Bill No. 111 — The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4389 
 Bill No. 113 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4389 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4390 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


