


















































May 31, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 68A  THURSDAY, MAY 31, 2018, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4445 
 May 31, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve got a couple introductions to start . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Thanks for the leave, everyone. It’s 
going to be extended — how’s that? 
 
An Hon. Member: — We recognize the Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you so much. Sitting on the floor of the 
side, I’d like to introduce, behind the bar, Mr. Nadeem Naz and 
his daughter, Rania. I had the opportunity to meet both of them, 
but Rania in particular, at a fundraiser to build schools in 
Pakistan. And I was there with the member for Regina Pasqua 
at the time. 
 
But Rania is 16 years old. She goes to Johnson Collegiate. She 
enjoys drawing and colouring and shopping and visiting with 
her school friends. And we had a great discussion in regards to 
my role. And it’s a real honour to have you in this Assembly, 
and this is your Assembly. So could I have all members join me 
in welcoming Rania to her Assembly, and her father, Nadeem. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, the summer tour schedule for the 
Saskatchewan Legislative Building has started, and tours of the 
building are offered every half-hour from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m., 7 
days a week. They’re available in French and English, and 
visitors from all over the world will be exploring provincial 
history and visiting our Legislative Assembly. 
 
Seated in the Speaker’s gallery, please give a warm welcome to 
the visitor services summer team. Just give us a wave when I 
say your name: Ross Zimmerman, Ava Tomasiewicz, Antoine 
Guenette, Cassie Baragar, Shanaya Cossette. They’re 
accompanied by Kelly Liberet and Arnold McKenzie, senior 
information officers, and Marianne Morgan, program 
coordinator and supervisor. 
 
I’d like to extend a special appreciation to Marianne for her 
efforts in keeping things running smoothly as the interim 
director of visitor services. Thank you, Marianne. Please join 
me in welcoming the visitor services team to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join you 
and welcome a long-time friend of mine, Nadeem Naz, with his 
daughter Rania Naz. Mr. Speaker, Nadeem has been living in 
Regina since the last 27-28 years, and since the last 16 years he 
has been volunteering in CJTR 91.3 FM community radio on 
Saturday from 1 to 2 o’clock. And Rania his daughter is here, is 
a very strong girl and has many school friends. I ask all the 
members to join me and welcome them again in their 
legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you very much. I join with the 
Speaker and the member opposite to welcome these impressive 
leaders in our community to their Assembly. And I also ask for 
leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, 
seated in your gallery, it’s a tremendous honour to welcome 
Anna Marriott to the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly, all 
the way from Montreal, visiting here this week. I understand 
she spent a day working in a local independent business, that 
she visited six small towns, that she hiked Castle Butte down in 
the Big Muddy, that she supported many local breweries, Mr. 
Speaker. I understand she also chased a tornado while here as 
well. So I ask all members to welcome Anna here. 
 
And along with Anna, and the reason she’s visiting, she’s 
visiting her good friend Aleana Young. It’s an honour to have 
Aleana here. Aleana is a small-business owner here in Regina, 
Takeaway Gourmet, Mr. Speaker. She’s also elected as the 
vice-president of the Saskatchewan School Boards Association, 
as a trustee with the public school board. She served as an 
incredible candidate in Regina University, Mr. Speaker, for the 
NDP [New Democratic Party], and we’ll be joining tonight with 
Aleana, I think, at the India pavilion at 7 o’clock. All are 
welcome. We’ll be bartending, slinging some cold mango lassi, 
maybe some cold Kingfishers as well. But I ask all members to 
welcome Aleana and Anna to the Saskatchewan Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly a school group from St. Luke School in 
Saskatoon. St. Luke School is actually just down about four 
houses from where I used to live. These 36 grade 5 students are 
accompanied by their teachers, Cari Karakochuk, Jeff Saganski, 
and a number of parent chaperones: Maria Cheke, Lorne 
Knihniski, Curtis Mintkawetz, Lisa Thompson-Tkachuk, 
Michelle Wilfing, Shannon Hoiness, Fiore Kahsai, Noreen 
Mahoney, Amy Sturgeon, and Andrea Papouches. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s sort of a tradition here that the MLAs that 
are introducing students are obliged to buy them juice 
afterwards. And, Mr. Speaker, of course I’m going to do that. 
But there’s always a lot of banter from the people behind that 
you should be buying ice cream as well. Well, Mr. Speaker, to 
those students I would say this: there won’t be ice cream today, 
but if they go on Friday to their school, we will be doing one of 
our neighbourhood barbecues right outside their school. And 
they’re welcome to come for hot dogs and fire truck rides and a 
bouncy castle. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to tell the members 
opposite that the money for this was raised through a turkey 
fundraiser. And, Mr. Speaker, to them and all of their teachers, 
we’d welcome them on Friday. 
 



4446 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2018 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
introduce two guests seated in the east gallery today, Mr. 
Speaker, two folks who I am happy to count as friends and as 
general rabble-rousers in all the best ways, Mr. Speaker. Seated 
in the east gallery are Shirley Dixon and Abby Ulmer. I will 
have the opportunity to deliver a member’s statement very 
shortly recognizing some of the great work that Abby does in 
our community, but also wanted to recognize Shirley for her 
contributions in the community. And I’d invite all members to 
join me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in the west gallery there is a school group from Moose Jaw 
that’s here. I’d like to welcome them. There’s 23 grade 5 and 6 
students from Westmount Elementary School. You can give us 
a wave if you like. That’s great. It’s always nice to have 
students come into their legislature and watch us. So I’d like to 
welcome here . . . We’re going to be meeting . . . They’re going 
to have a nice little tour. We’ll meet them a little later for a 
picture and some questions. 
 
So along with them is their teacher, Debbie Taylor-French, and 
chaperones, Jessica Reid, Lynne Bowerin, Megan Moore, 
Megan Fortin, Trina Dosch, and Leah Rusnak. So I’d like 
everyone to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly, and 
we’ll talk to them later. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join the 
member from Moose Jaw North in welcoming the students from 
my hometown of Moose Jaw. And a particular hello to Debbie 
Taylor-French. Debbie’s parents, Ray and Judy Taylor, are my 
parents’ next door neighbours on 2nd Avenue in Moose Jaw, 
and that’s been a great friendship between our families, and 
great to see Debbie here. 
 
I also want to mention a couple of other people who are in the 
building today, in the gallery today. One of them has stepped 
out. She was here momentarily and has disappeared but I’m 
going to say something about her anyway. Melissa Bendig has 
been our director of issues management for a good while now, 
has been with our office for over three years. She is moving on 
to work with the Alberta Ministry of Energy and we’re really 
going to miss her work. 
 
We also have in the gallery today Deb McDonald, who is our 
interim chief of staff, who has done a terrific job helping us to 
be such an effective opposition this term. And I also want to 
recognize Mitch Bonokoski, who is our incoming director of 
issues management, a brilliant young man, been working with 
us for a long time, does always rock a very fine haircut as Trent 
points out. And just would like to ask the members to join me in 
welcoming them to their Assembly and thanking them for their 
work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 

Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the legislature, it’s my pleasure and 
honour to welcome my wife to the legislature today, the mother 
of three wonderful children and a very patient lady who has put 
up with me for 41 years. Mr. Speaker, in your gallery, please 
welcome my wife, Giselle, to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — No petitions. No petitions on the last day of 
the spring sitting. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

June is Pride Season 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, great 
news: June is Pride season here in Saskatchewan, and 
communities from Estevan to La Loche are proudly celebrating 
sexual diversity. 
 
I was especially delighted to bring a message of support to the 
Pride flag raising in Estevan this past Monday. This year’s 
theme is True Colours, something pretty special when we think 
of the rainbow flag and what it means in our communities for 
hope, respect, and pride. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was particularly pleased to note last week’s 
human rights ruling, a significant first in Canada that allows 
people of all ages to change or remove their gender marker on 
their birth certificates. Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate two 
brave young people, Renn and Jordyn, who led this fight for 
human rights and gender diversity. Judge Krogan, in her 
landmark ruling, insightfully said, referring to the Sask Human 
Rights Code, and I quote: 
 

The Code is essential to the health and strength of our 
community. Section 3 captures the objects of the Code 
which include the recognition of the inherent dignity and 
equal, inalienable rights of persons. The Code also 
supports the advancement of public policy that aims to 
eliminate discrimination. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to come out and support our 
queer community, our LGBTQ [lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender, queer and/or questioning], two-spirited friends, 
families, and neighbourhoods. Take some time to attend a flag 
raising, a Pride parade, even attend a drag queen show. Have 
some fun. Show your true colours. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 

Remembering Tony Day 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Tuesday I 
had the privilege to attend and speak at the funeral of Tony 
Day. 
 
Tony was born in Admiral, Saskatchewan in 1932 and moved to 
Carnduff in 1955. In 1960 he married Vi Bayliss, and from that 
time on it was known as Tony and Vi because they were a true 
partnership. They had four children, two daughters, two sons. 
And the company they built, Mr. Speaker, was Fast Trucking, 



May 31, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4447 

along with a number of other companies over the years in the 
oil fields and in farming. 
 
In 1999 Tony won the Southeast Oilman of the Year Award, 
and in 2009 he was inducted into the oilman’s Hall of Fame. 
Two of Tony’s proudest accomplishments was the building of a 
large bed truck for moving oil rigs called the sow, which 
weighed 50,000 pounds. But he had to outdo that, and then he 
built a 90,000-pound bed truck called Gerda. And it was named 
after Gerda Munsinger of spy fame in the 1960s, early ’70s, 
because they were both Internationals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a pleasure to be able to attend, Mr. Speaker. 
And, Tony, rest in peace. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
[10:15] 
 

Constituent Receives Protective Services Medal 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my distinct 
pleasure to rise today and recognize a constituent of mine, Abby 
Ulmer. Abby was the recipient of the Lieutenant Governor’s 
2017 Protective Services Award. Abby has been counselling 
survivors of violence and sexual assaults for almost 40 years, 
and she is the first civilian to win the Protective Services 
Award.  
 
The Saskatchewan Protective Services Medal is given to men 
and women who risk their own safety to serve and protect the 
people of Saskatchewan. The medal criteria was recently 
expanded to include workers in the victim services field. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Abby has served as an inspiration to many over 
the years. She’s been a leader for women in our community and 
is no stranger to receiving much-deserved accolades. Many in 
our community have benefited from Abby’s advocacy, wisdom, 
and drive to support victims and change culture and laws 
around sexual assault. Hundreds of volunteers have taken 
training from Abby, delivered with passion and with humour, in 
order to staff a 24-hour sexual assault line, including myself and 
the member from Douglas Park. 
 
I would like to call on all members in congratulating Abby 
Ulmer on receiving the 2017 Lieutenant Governor’s Protective 
Services Medal, and I would like to sincerely thank her for all 
that she has done and continues to do in our community. Thank 
you, Abby. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Saskatchewan Industrial and Mining Suppliers 
Association’s Annual General Meeting 

 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I had 
the opportunity to bring greetings on behalf of our government 
at the Saskatchewan Industrial and Mining Suppliers 
Association, or SIMSA, 2018 annual general meeting in 
Saskatoon. May 27th to June 2nd is Saskatchewan Mining 
Week, so it was fitting that the SIMSA members gathered in 
Saskatoon to discuss various initiatives that affect mining in our 

province. 
 
Just a day before the AGM [annual general meeting], SIMSA 
announced the development of their Saskatchewan supplier 
database, which is an exciting partnership with great potential 
for this organization. 
 
As a member of the board of directors with SaskBuilds, I have 
had the pleasure of working with innovative groups focusing on 
priorities for Saskatchewan industries such as SIMSA. Part of 
SaskBuilds’ mandate is planning strategic infrastructure that 
supports Saskatchewan suppliers in the public procurement 
process. That work is led by the good folks on SaskBuilds’ 
Priority Saskatchewan team, including the acting president and 
CEO [chief executive officer], Ron Dedman, who also joined 
me in attending the AGM. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a significant part of Priority Saskatchewan’s work 
is engaging with key stakeholders such as SIMSA who often 
provide our team with valuable feedback and advice. It was an 
honour to thank SIMSA on behalf of our government for 
sharing their advice, experience, and suggestions to better 
improve public procurement in our province.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
SIMSA on another successful AGM, and for all their hard work 
and leadership in the past year. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Foster Parenting Initiative 
 
Mr. Goudy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in the 
House to mention those whose names may not be in lights, but 
for many of us and those who they served, they’re heroes. My 
wife and I have always held a special level of honour for the 
foster parents that we know. These are friends of ours who 
didn’t wait for others to step up, but they saw children without a 
home and said, let’s open our homes, let’s open our hearts. 
 
Our Minister of Social Services and his deputy minister have a 
huge responsibility on their shoulders and are the lead in 
ensuring care for the most physically and emotionally 
vulnerable among us. Their foster new beginnings and 
strengthening family-based care initiative has resulted in 
bringing the current number of foster-approved homes to 500. 
These are great programs, but need a provincial team of 
families to step up if it is going to succeed. 
 
So I would like to recognize today some of my heroes. Steve 
and Julie Schmale, Matt and Crystal Toews, Jason and Pam 
Kellington, Paul and Rose Dubois are people from my town 
who all built new homes, renovated, or bought new places to 
make room in their homes and already big hearts for those in 
need. Today I want to honour and thank them Mr. Speaker. 
 
And also, I happen to know that we have here with us in this 
House a member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, as well as others 
with their families, who have opened their hearts and opened 
their homes, Mr. Speaker. So please help me recognize these 
friends of ours for the work of love that they have done and 
continue to do for the people of our great province. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 



4448 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2018 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 

Ecology Class Wins Agriculture Grant 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to acknowledge an inspiring teacher and some very 
engaged students who are exploring and involved in a fantastic 
program running in a middle-years school in my constituency. 
E.S. Laird Middle School in Lloydminster has developed a 
unique and impressive eco-class for their grade 9 students. 
Guided by their teacher, Shaun Donald, it’s helping students in 
this class develop life skills in agriculture and science, both of 
which are very important to the growth of our economy and 
developing young entrepreneurs for the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some examples of projects the class works on include building 
and working with garden boxes, building a hydroponic and 
aquaponic bay, establishing a honeybee observation hive, 
installing rain barrels, and creating several types of composting 
units. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the significant creation of this 
program, which has engaged the students of E.S. Laird Middle 
School, our local Peavey Mart chose to award them a Peavey 
Mart agriculture grant which will help the program grow and 
expand into the future. This grant will provide $50,000 in 
funding over the next three years. Jest Sidloski of Peavey 
Industries noted that the importance of local agriculture and 
food production, which this project emphasized, played a big 
role in the class winning this grant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this entire Assembly, I’d like to 
congratulate Shaun Donald and all his students for winning the 
Peavey Mart agriculture grant, and thank Peavey Mart for 
investing in this worthwhile local project. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Martensville-Warman. 
 

Opposition’s Performance 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The spring session 
started just a few weeks ago, and it was a time for renewal for 
all of us. Our new Premier took his seat in the Chamber for the 
first time, as did the Leader of the Opposition. And on that very 
first day, the Leader of the Opposition stood in this Chamber 
and stated that he wanted to do politics differently. So after 42 
sitting days, how different is the opposition? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they have yet to tell us how they would 
create jobs and grow our economy. Their only plan is the 
leader’s platform, which proposes $2.5 billion a year in new 
spending with absolutely no plan to pay for it. Same old NDP. 
They continue to support the Justin Trudeau carbon tax being 
imposed on families and businesses in our province. In fact, 
their leader called our fight against the carbon tax a pointless 
crusade. Same old NDP.  
 
They’re back to their old tricks of drive-by smears, shoddy 
research, and making accusations with no facts to back them up. 
We’ve heard unfounded allegations, questions about secret 
meetings that never happened. They’ve made unfounded 
accusations of conflict of interest by members, and they’ve 

even accused Saskatchewan businesses of buying government 
contracts. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if that’s doing government differently or 
doing politics differently, we’re just not interested. It’s weak 
leadership, Mr. Speaker, and it’s the same old NDP. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — Well that’s a good lead-in. I recognize the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 

United States Government Imposing Tariffs on 
Canadian Steel 

 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning we have 
learned about troubling developments south of the border that 
have the potential to do serious damage right here in Regina. 
The Trump administration has announced that it will be 
imposing tariffs on Canadian steel at midnight tonight. 
 
The United States is a very important customer for our steel 
exports, and these tariffs would have a serious negative impact 
on the Saskatchewan economy. We’ve been strongly urging the 
federal government to take action that would protect jobs of 
Saskatchewan steelworkers. Is the Premier engaged on this file, 
and what’s his plan to address the damage these tariffs could do 
to Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And I thank the member opposite for what is a very important 
question on behalf of the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, and that is the announcement with the 
imposition of a steel tariff by the United States on our industry 
here in Saskatchewan, most notably . . . or pardon me, the 
industry in Canada. But most notably we’re concerned as well 
with the industry here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re disappointed by this decision, obviously. I spoke with the 
Prime Minister yesterday on this topic precisely. I’ll be heading 
to Washington next week to engage on all trade topics, but in 
particular as well, the topic of steel and the steel tariff that has 
been announced here, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll continue to 
advocate, advocate for the trade agreements that we need and 
require here to be successful in our economy in the province of 
Saskatchewan, trade agreements surrounding all of our export 
products including our steel products. And we’ll continue to 
advocate for those projects that use Saskatchewan steel, Mr. 
Speaker, such as Keystone, such as Trans Mountain, such as 
projects that utilize Saskatchewan resources that are sustainable, 
sustainably produced as anywhere in the world. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Shared Priorities of Government and Opposition 
 
Mr. Meili: — At the start of this spring session — the 
Premier’s first in his new role, my first as Leader of the 
Opposition — I asked the Premier if there was any common 
ground on which we could work together. Now although of 
course there were plenty of disagreements along the way, we 



May 31, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4449 

did find a few patches of common ground here and there. 
 
We were very glad to see the government finally agree to a full 
repeal of Bill 40, a bill that opened us up to seeing our Crown 
corporations privatized. And we were glad to hear the 
government will be moving forward with a domestic violence 
strategy and a sexual assault strategy. We were glad to hear 
yesterday that the Sask Party’s changed its position and will be 
updating our parental leave laws to bring them in line with 
federal changes. And we were glad to hear that the Premier has 
seen the light and now supports universal pharmacare in 
Canada. So my question for the Premier is, what’s next? What 
other common cause do you see us finding common ground on 
in the coming months? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, again I appreciate the 
question. With respect to the opportunity that we’ve had to 
come to agreement on a number of issue — most notably the 
strategies around domestic violence, Mr. Speaker, as well as 
sexual assault, the changes that were made to Bill 40, Mr. 
Speaker — it seems to be a little bit of one party moving one 
direction. So I would ask the members opposite to come over 
and join us on a number of policy issues that are important to 
the people of the province, Mr. Speaker, people across the 
province. We can continue to align on these issues, and ones 
that we already do with the New Democrats, Mr. Speaker, such 
as the resource revenue sharing in the province of 
Saskatchewan being for all people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I would ask the members opposite to join us in advocating 
for the Kinder Morgan Trans Mountain pipeline, Mr. Speaker, 
both in this House, outside this House, and across the province 
to ensure that we can put that Canadian-Saskatchewan steel into 
that project, Mr. Speaker, and continue to have the 
opportunities for not just our steel producers here in the 
province but the advancement of our economy as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I’d ask the members opposite — all of the members 
opposite — to come over and stand with Saskatchewan people 
to ensure that we will not have the imposition of a federal 
carbon tax on our industries, jobs, and families across this 
province, Mr. Speaker, as we can do much better with that, with 
the plan put forward by the Minister of the Environment, the 
plan for a prairie resilience, a plan that will actually have 
results, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of the nation of 
Canada. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Although we are glad 
that the government decided to adopt a few of our proposals, 
we’ve got a lot more that we’d like to see implemented. 
 
We’d love it if they’d reinstate the tens of millions of dollars 
they’ve cut from education, and fully restore funding to our 
province’s classrooms. We’ve called on them to scrap their cuts 
to the rental housing supplement and to job-training programs, 
and start making the smart investments that will stimulate the 
economy that will create jobs in this difficult situation. We’ve 

also called for an increase to the shameful situation where 
we’ve got the lowest minimum wage in Canada. Let’s get . . . 
The situation where we don’t have people working full time and 
living in poverty. 
 
And we’ve asked to see this government commit to real action 
on reconciliation with First Nations and Métis people, with 
things like a suicide strategy and an apology on the Sixties 
Scoop. And we’ve called day after day for a full judicial inquiry 
into what went down at the GTH [Global Transportation Hub]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our team has plenty of ideas. We’d be more than 
happy to discuss how we can improve the lives of 
Saskatchewan people together. Does the Premier have any 
interest in taking up any of those ideas as well? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, we have a number of ideas as 
well, Mr. Speaker, and those ideas have come about through our 
engagement with people across the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, engagement that . . . After today, our MLAs 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] on this side of the House 
will be out in their constituencies, Mr. Speaker, working with 
the people and conversing with the people in their 
constituencies to ensure that this government, their people’s 
government in the province of Saskatchewan has every 
opportunity to continue to represent our people in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, all of our people in this province, on the issues 
that are important to them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:30] 
 
To ensure that we can continue to invest in our classrooms, Mr. 
Speaker, which I’d appreciate the members opposite 
acknowledging, the investment directly into our classrooms 
across the province of Saskatchewan. To acknowledge the 
investment into health care, Mr. Speaker, the investment into 
reducing our surgery wait times here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, yes, by using private surgery clinics, Mr. 
Speaker, in the public system. 
 
To acknowledge the successes of these initiatives that have 
been put forward, the investment that has been put forward, Mr. 
Speaker, in the things that matter to the people across the 
province of Saskatchewan. We’ll continue to engage with that 
throughout the summer with members across this side of the 
House heading out to our communities, Mr. Speaker, tomorrow. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Former Member and Activities in China 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier will forgive us if, when 
we see a cut of $54 million to education and we saw 7.5 put in 
back last year, if we’re not doing backflips of joy, and neither 
are the teachers or students across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday we learned that after Bill Boyd left 
cabinet, he made a phone call to one William Wang, a 
high-level civil servant in the Ministry of the Economy, just 
before Mr. Boyd travelled to China to promote his 
irrigation-immigration investment scheme. Now it’s clear that 



4450 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2018 

Mr. Boyd and Mr. Wang have grown to know each other quite 
well during Mr. Boyd’s time as minister of the Economy. They 
travelled to China together, along with one Laurie Pushor, on 
several occasions. 
 
But if Mr. Boyd and his business associates were using their 
connections in the civil service to advance Mr. Boyd’s own 
business agenda in China as a private citizen, that would be a 
very serious conflict of interest. Yesterday the minister said 
he’s asked his deputy minister to investigate. Will the Premier 
commit to investigating all of Mr. Boyd’s activities in China 
and to making the details of this investigation public? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, there’s two questions in there. 
I’ll address the second one first, Mr. Speaker. But yesterday or 
this week there was legitimate questions that were raised 
regarding a member of our public service, Mr. Speaker, and we 
take these questions very seriously. 
 
My answer today is exactly the same as the answer yesterday, 
that the Minister of Trade and Export, Mr. Speaker, has advised 
his deputy minister to review these concerns. These are very 
troubling for the Government of Saskatchewan. And I would 
say that the public service has very strong conflict-of-interest 
guidelines, and we expect that those guidelines will be adhered 
to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I do want to correct part of the Leader of the Opposition’s 
question, Mr. Speaker, with respect to our education funding in 
this province and our commitment to our education sector in 
this province and our commitment to the students, our next 
generation that are in that sector, Mr. Speaker. Over the past 10 
years that education funding is up well over double, Mr. 
Speaker, up 164 per cent in those years. There’s 40 new schools 
across the province, Mr. Speaker. There’s 800 more teachers 
working across the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The record of the government on this side, Mr. Speaker, in 
education, has been strong. It’s been strong because this is what 
the people of the province value, Mr. Speaker. We’re going out 
tomorrow to continue to engage with the people on all files 
important to them, Mr. Speaker, including the education sector. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, yes, I expect they’ll hear quite an 
earful as they’re out talking to folks who are trying to teach in 
crumbling schools and overcrowded classrooms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, backdoor deals, backdoor deals and relationships 
with uncertain motivations like the one between Mr. Boyd and 
Mr. Wang are the precise reason that the public is growing 
extremely wary of placing their trust in this government. We 
need to set a much higher bar as MLAs. People need to be able 
to put their trust in us as their representatives. 
 
But this never-ending list of infractions by Bill Boyd — 
someone Brad Wall referred to as the DNA of the Sask Party — 
these infractions undermine that trust that people should be able 
to have in the people working in this building. Mr. Speaker, if 
Mr. Boyd and his business associations made a profit out of 

their connections in the civil service, that is a very serious 
problem. 
 
Saskatchewan people deserve better than an internal 
investigation that doesn’t report back to the public. So I repeat 
my question, which we didn’t get a clear answer on: will the 
Premier commit to investigating all of Bill Boyd’s dealings in 
China, and will he commit to making the results of that 
investigation public so that we all know exactly what 
happened? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, the Minister of 
Export and Trade has asked his deputy minister to review this 
file, Mr. Speaker. There are public service standards that need 
to be met and will be met, Mr. Speaker, in this case and any 
other case in the public service. 
 
And the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
MLAs in this Assembly, we all report to the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner, Mr. Speaker, as we have, Mr. Speaker. We all 
report any of our interests to the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner. Mr. Speaker, in this particular case, I’ve said the 
Minister of Trade and Export has advised that his deputy 
minister will review this file, Mr. Speaker. This is a very 
troubling incident for the Government of Saskatchewan and we 
will deal with it appropriately. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Classroom Supports 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve spent much of this session 
discussing mental health but we’ve yet to see concrete steps to 
help kids grappling with mental illness. While the minister 
points to pilots in the future, there are kids suffering in our 
schools today. 
 
After last year’s $54 million cut, divisions around the province 
cut psychologists, cut counselling services, and reduced student 
supports. These were experts already working in our schools 
supporting our kids. If the minister is serious about tackling 
mental health issues in our schools, he only needs to look to his 
budget and fully restore that $54 million cut that was taken out 
of classrooms. Will the minister and that Premier do the right 
thing and fully restore funding to bring back these desperately 
needed supports in our kids’ classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
before I answer that, I do need to make one comment. The 
Leader of the Opposition, when he was standing up asking a 
question about public education, talked about seven and a half 
million dollars. What he failed to remember, Mr. Speaker, is 
that this government in this budget annualized that funding in 
this budget to $30 million, Mr. Speaker, a clear commitment of 
this government’s responsibility and commitment to public 
funding of education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that includes mental health services, Mr. Speaker. 
Psychologists, psychiatrists, Mr. Speaker, these services are 



May 31, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4451 

provided within our school system. We’ll continue to support 
students, Mr. Speaker. We’ve talked on this side of the House 
about the projects that we’re working on with the Minister of 
Health and the Ministry of Health with respect to providing 
services in the classroom, looking at the Alberta model, Mr. 
Speaker, which has been presented to us. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the commitment that this government has 
made to public education is clear. We will continue to do that. 
We’ll continue to have conversations with leaders in the 
educational community, Mr. Speaker, teachers, school board 
trustees, parents, administrators, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that 
we’re doing the right thing for children in our classrooms. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I do sincerely hope that that 
minister and that Premier and all members across the aisle do 
get out into those classrooms and really listen to what’s going 
on in our classrooms. You talk to anyone on the front lines and 
they will tell you that wait-lists for public or even private 
counselling are staggering. And school divisions like those in 
P.A. [Prince Albert], that used to have counsellors come into 
the schools, had to cancel those contracts as a result of this 
government’s cuts. Does the minister actually think that this is 
serving our kids? 
 
At a time when school divisions are struggling to support kids 
who are dealing with bullying, dealing with suicide crises 
across the province, we should be doing all that we can, not 
sitting complacent. Will the minister commit today to 
developing a comprehensive and coordinated response that 
ensures that all, all Saskatchewan kids have access to timely 
and appropriate mental health supports? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, this government’s always 
committed to sitting down and having conversations with 
leaders in the educational community, Mr. Speaker. The 
funding that we provide to school divisions is generally 
unconditional, Mr. Speaker. School boards have the decisions, 
have those opportunities to make the decisions in terms of 
where the resources are put in, Mr. Speaker. And as I’ve said 
before, $30 million in additional funding in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, with a commitment to consider how the funding 
formula will be enhanced in years to come, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But here’s the facts, Mr. Speaker. $30 million in funding 
provides for 400 counsellors, psychologists, and social workers, 
236 counsellors, 70 psychologists, and 78 social workers, Mr. 
Speaker, and a number of other programs which we support — 
the Kids Help Line, anti-bullying resources and grants, Mr. 
Speaker. And we know how important anti-bullying procedures 
and processes are in our school divisions, Mr. Speaker. We had 
a Legislative Secretary report on that, Mr. Speaker, and we took 
action on that report. And mental health first-aid training, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a clear commitment that this government is 
committed to making sure that we serve the best interests of our 
children. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Housing Navigator Position and 
Rental Housing Supplement 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, last week the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission released a report on 
access and equality for renters in receipt of public assistance. 
Mr. Speaker, the issue of system navigation came out loud and 
clear as a barrier for people to secure stable housing. The best 
experts on the needs of people who access social services are 
the service users themselves, Mr. Speaker, and clear solutions 
were offered by those very people. 
 
So I’ll ask: will this government listen to the Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Commission’s report, review program 
application procedures to remove barriers, and create a housing 
navigator position dedicated to supporting people through 
processes to alleviate the real challenges on and limitations 
placed on people in need when trying to secure a home? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
thank the Human Rights Commissioner for the report that we 
received last week, and I’m glad that the members of the 
opposition have had time to read it. I’ve actually had time to go 
up and meet with the Human Rights Commissioner last Friday 
with my staff, and meet with his staff specifically to talk about 
this report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some of the details that came out in the report were very 
favourable, Mr. Speaker. There are some landlords that are 
discriminating against people that are on social assistance. We 
need that to stop, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, what I want to 
talk about is, specifically, if there are some people that are 
having some disability within their lives, Mr. Speaker, that they 
have the opportunity to be able to find appropriate housing. 
 
What the member opposite is referencing, we already have that, 
Mr. Speaker. We have a home repair program that landlords can 
access. And what they will do, Mr. Speaker, is they will work 
with the adaptation for independence program, Mr. Speaker. 
We work on this on a case-by-case basis. We do not have one 
specific home as we don’t see one specific disability. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear right now that 
this minister and this government are failing to provide the 
supports that people need. And these are people that are the 
most vulnerable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been fighting hard all session against this 
government’s callous cuts to the most vulnerable, and we’ve 
heard this government’s attempts time and time again to excuse 
their cuts. We’ve heard them try hard to somehow excuse their 
attack on hard-working families, on families on the margins, 
and people living with disabilities. 
 
But what we haven’t heard, Mr. Speaker, are real answers or an 
understanding of the real impacts of the callous choices of their 
government. So I’ll ask this Premier one more time: will he do 
the right thing and restore the rental housing supplement for the 



4452 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2018 

most vulnerable in our province before it causes devastation all 
across our province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I love 
the opportunity to correct the record. Mr. Speaker, we haven’t 
cancelled the rental housing supplement program. We have over 
$46 million. I have said this on my feet in the House. I have 
said it in committee. We’re getting phone calls in our office 
because the opposition is going out there and fearmongering 
with the province, Mr. Speaker. This is unacceptable. People 
are concerned about this. 
 
People that are on the existing rental housing supplement that 
are receiving, if they’re eligibility stays the same, Mr. Speaker, 
there are no changes. I would really wish that the opposition 
wouldn’t fearmonger, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As far as what is in the disability files, Mr. Speaker, I am very 
disappointed at the opposition. They stand up in this House and 
talk about people with disabilities. I don’t see them at any of the 
events that my colleagues and I get to go to on a daily basis, 
Mr. Speaker. They were talking it about it yesterday when the 
people were here on the transit. I didn’t hear any questions in 
estimates the other day, Mr. Speaker. We go to these files. We 
talk to these people. Mr. Speaker, this is a flavour of the day for 
them. We work and live this file every day. Thanks, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Wait Times in Hospital Emergency Rooms 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it is so hard to sit suffering in an 
emergency room for hours waiting to get the help you or your 
loved one needs. This is why we continue to hear often about 
these struggles from families and patients and why it is so 
important to get it right. This government knows this, and that’s 
why they promised zero emergency room waits by the end of 
last year. Well they walked this promise back to a 60 per cent 
reduction by 2019, and now the ministry’s newest plan quietly 
revised this goal to 35 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are still nowhere near meeting even that goal. 
It’s one thing to set bold targets, but it doesn’t mean anything if 
it isn’t paired with making the right investments and getting the 
job done. Why, six years after this government’s promise, are 
things still getting worse? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
emergency wait times are obviously a very serious issue. This is 
not an issue that’s unique to Saskatchewan. This is an issue that 
all provinces are grappling with. The Minister of Rural and 
Remote Health and myself hear about this frequently at 
federal-provincial-territorial Health ministers’ conferences, Mr. 
Speaker. What we have done, Mr. Speaker, is we have 
increased acute care bed capacity in the largest hospitals, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re looking at other options we can do. 
 

[10:45] 
 
We’ve announced the accountable care units that we have three 
up and running in Regina, one in Saskatoon right now, Mr. 
Speaker. The early indications are that those look very 
optimistic for us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as far as setting targets, Mr. Speaker, this 
government is about setting targets. We’ve done that many 
times. Unfortunately this one, one we haven’t met, unlike the 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker, when they were in 
government, who said they didn’t want to set targets, Mr. 
Speaker, because unfortunately they probably wouldn’t meet 
them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What this minister 
has is a moving target. Yes, there has been initiatives, but if we 
are still not getting these waits under control, the solution isn’t 
to keep moving the goalposts. It’s to make smart investments 
and do better. In Saskatoon, the largest centre in the province, 
Mr. Speaker, every wait measured has increased. Patients are 
waiting an average of three hours just to see a doctor, and it is 
taking nearly a full day to get an in-patient bed. We know that 
hallway medicine is still an everyday reality, and people 
continue to receive care in pods. Why would this government 
throw in the towel and move the goalpost instead of ramping up 
investment to start making progress on this serious issue? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, we do take this 
issue very seriously. I talked about the accountable care units. 
Since those have been established, the wait times for an 
in-patient bed at Pasqua have reduced by 35 per cent. Wait 
times for an in-patient bed at St. Paul’s has been reduced by 24 
per cent. We’ll have three more of these units up and running 
by the end of year, Mr. Speaker, one more at the Pasqua and 
two more at St. Paul’s. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as I said, you know, the member opposite is 
criticizing us for not setting targets, Mr. Speaker. But we have 
set a number of targets that we’ve been very pleased that we 
have met, Mr. Speaker: 3,700 more nurses, 900 more doctors, 
hundreds . . . well the member doesn’t want to listen, Mr. 
Speaker. Hundreds more long-term care workers, Mr. Speaker. 
We have much more work to do. We’re very concerned about 
this issue, Mr. Speaker, but we’re going to continue to work on 
it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

State of Provincial Economy 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
government that had a billion-dollar tax increase to the people 
of Saskatchewan last year. And today now, Mr. Speaker, we see 
that jobs are down. Oil production, while increasing in Alberta, 
flatlined in Saskatchewan. Wholesale trade, increasing in the 
Western provinces, decreasing in Saskatchewan. Retail sales, 
same thing. Building permits down, new construction down. 



May 31, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4453 

The continued agricultural transportation crisis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt Saskatchewan’s economy is 
lagging behind with the Sask Party government in control. Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t want spin and bluster from the minister. I want 
answers. What are you doing about the jobs that we’re losing? 
What are you doing about the steel tariffs and Saskatchewan’s 
flatlining economy? Can you do your job so people stop losing 
theirs? Mr. Speaker, the buck stops here. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, there they are. There’s all the 
questions that we were waiting for the other day in estimates, 
right there, Mr. Speaker, from the northern member, the critic 
for the Ministry of Highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
No questions in estimates the other day on education, Mr. 
Speaker. No questions about our $30 million investment in the 
classrooms across the province, Mr. Speaker. No questions, no 
questions, Mr. Speaker, about the investment over the last 10 
years in our advanced education system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
No question on the record budgets in Highways, Mr. Speaker, 
across this province, Mr. Speaker. No questions on highways, 
the transportation network to get our export products out of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
No question on one of the largest challenges we have in this 
province right now, Mr. Speaker, the imposition of a federal 
carbon tax, Mr. Speaker. No questions on behalf of the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan on how members on this side 
are going to stand with those people across the province and 
stand with their jobs and their families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
No question on corrections, Mr. Speaker, some of the crime 
challenges we’ve had and how this government is implementing 
the PRT [protection and response team] to deal with those 
challenges, and no questions on ag and energy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be off to Washington next week to advocate 
on behalf of the people of this province and the strong economy 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. And members on this House are 
heading back to their constituencies, because they appreciate 
the opportunity to serve as the people’s government in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And we will continue 
to engage and represent them, Mr. Speaker, throughout this 
summer and into the future. 
 
The Speaker: — And there you have it. Order. Well apparently 
I’m just standing here on my own. 
 
Well that was rather spirited. Thanks for that. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Whip. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 307 through 318. 
 

The Speaker: — Tabled 307 to 318. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I’d like to ask leave to make a motion to 
do with the parliamentary calendar. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I move: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day in accordance with the parliamentary calendar, it shall 
stand adjourned until 10 a.m. on October 24th, 2018, 
unless earlier recalled by Mr. Speaker on the request of the 
government. And if recalled, Mr. Speaker shall give each 
member seven days’ clear notice, if possible, of such a date 
and time. 

 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved: 

 
That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day in accordance with the parliamentary calendar, it shall 
stand adjourned until 10 a.m. on October 24th, 2018, 
unless earlier recalled by Mr. Speaker upon the request of 
the government. And if recalled, Mr. Speaker shall give 
each member seven days’ clear notice, if possible, of such 
date and time. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask leave to 
make some remarks on the session. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked to 
make some concluding comments about the session. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
 



4454 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2018 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Expressions of Thanks 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to stand up here. It’s been a long, long session. I want to first 
thank the Premier for giving me confidence in the job, and I 
tried to do the best I could and I hope he was satisfied. We’ve 
had three . . . Basically myself, it’s still a learning curve, which 
. . . I learned a new rule today on the petition rule. I guess I 
didn’t read the rule book end to end like I’ve told some 
members I have. I won’t say where that rule came from and 
who submitted it. 
 
But as yourself, Leader of the Opposition, our Premier, and 
yourself, we’re all just rookies I guess in this session. And I’ll 
say everybody has did an excellent job. 
 
Yourself, Mr. Speaker. I’ve sat in that chair as deputy speaker 
and I know how hard it can be because everything happens very 
fast and you have to make decisions right there. I will say that 
you wear that hat very well and you did a very good job. I’m 
impressed. And I don’t — and if you ask my members, as you 
know, you’ve sat with me in caucus — I don’t say that very 
often to members. 
 
I also want to . . . The Opposition House Leader and their team. 
She’s also new to this job and she’s kept me on her toes. She is 
very smart and I’ve had to watch. You know, I worked very 
well with her. One thing I will say, she’s very respectful and 
very, very good to deal with. Their House leadership is . . . 
We’ve, you know, had a few challenges, but I want to 
acknowledge to their House leadership team how, you know . . . 
One of them was dealing with the Humboldt tragedy. You 
know, we worked together that day, your team and our team, 
together. Politics were set aside so that the members and 
everybody that works in this House could send their 
condolences to the victims’ families. 
 
I want to acknowledge my chief of staff, or my House research, 
Jarret Coels who’s probably did most of the work. We work 
together as a team. In fact, I know what he’s saying right now to 
the TV. He’s saying, I did all the work. But he helped me 
through a lot of the rules and regulations and did a lot of the 
work. 
 
One of the things I will mention: the night the power went out, 
that was a challenge. We lost I think five hours of committee 
work. I think he spent two more hours on the phone trying to 
rearrange them hours, built them into the system. You know, I 
want to thank ministers, members, committee Chairs, and the 
opposition for working together so that we could accomplish 
that and get the work done. 
 
You know, the members have put in long hours, but we also 
forget about the people that put in longer hours, the 
behind-the-scene people, you know, the Clerks, who are here at 
8 or before. And when then I turn around and I schedule a 
committee till 10:30 at night, the opposition critic will want to 
maybe ask a few more questions past 10:30. The committee 
Chair allows that, which is fine. Then they have to do 
paperwork afterwards. They’re here till 11 at night; they’re back 
here before 8 the next morning, if I happen to be in their office, 

asking them questions. 
 
And it’s just not the Clerks that put in long hours and give us a 
lot of advice. They’ve walked us through, myself through a lot 
of the situations, and I know I’ve been in their office lots. And I 
appreciate the advice and working very well with the Clerks. 
But it’s also Hansard; the video people. The one night when 
committee was sitting, I went down. I didn’t realize where it 
was sitting; it’s behind room 8. And they’ve got like about 15 
monitors going at the same time. They’re monitoring two 
different committees, different shots, working the mikes, along 
them lines. 
 
And we forget about them. We never see them people. But 
they’re there, and they’re putting in long hours. They’ve given 
up their nights where they’d sooner be at a baseball game with 
their kids, with their grandkids, because we’re sitting here at 
night. And we think we are the only ones here that are working. 
It’s not. It’s all the people behind the scenes that make that 
happen, that allow us to do our job. And I want to thank them, 
because I don’t think they’re thanked enough. 
 
I also want to thank Michelle Lang who works with Jarret, who 
stands out faithfully every day at that door and hands each 
minister his script so they can get through second and third 
readings. Because I know if she missed a day, I’m pretty sure it 
would look like The Three Stooges in here a lot of days. But 
she faithfully makes sure everybody has their script and 
everybody is on cue. I want to thank her for that. She never, 
never missed a day. 
 
Security too, you know, they also sit outside the rooms. They’re 
sitting here. They’re early in the morning, late at night, you 
know. All the other people that work in the cafeteria, that work 
in cleaning the building, that work all behind the scenes to 
make this a great building. Visitor services, you know, there’s 
. . . This building is, you know, a jewel of Saskatchewan and it 
needs to be well maintained, well looked after, and the people 
that do are very proud of it, the work here in all aspects of it, 
right from . . . everybody from one end to the other. 
 
As House Leader you start to realize the different aspects of 
jobs of people that you deal with, that are working behind the 
scenes to make this a very good job . . . When somebody else 
does that, I’ll just say yes, another $20,000 mike gone. Sorry for 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:00] 
 
I also want to thank my CAs [constituency assistant] who — 
and this applies to each member on both sides of the House — 
while we’re here working, they’re back doing the work of the 
constituencies. They’re the ones taking the calls, taking the 
meetings, setting things up, faxing us stuff, emailing us, you 
know. They’re on the phone. I want to give a thank you to not 
only my CAs that allow me to work here but each and every 
other CAs that do the work, you know. 
 
I want to thank my hired man, Kevin, and my nephew Cole, 
who ran the farm so they allowed me to be here so I could work 
every day. But it’s been enjoyable as Government House 
Leader because I have good people to work with on this side 
and on that side. And you know, another ones are the media. 



May 31, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4455 

You know, people forget about them but they’re here every day, 
you know, and they’re doing their job . . . that they, you know, 
as well all the different aspects have just been pointed out to me 
of the people. 
 
I know that I will have forgotten somebody in this building or 
some person, but from myself as the House Leader it’s been a 
pleasure working with the opposition. They did their job. You 
know, they were very capable at it but they did it respectfully 
and they did it professionally. And our members and our 
ministers acted the same way, respectful and did their job 
professionally. And that’s what the people of Saskatchewan ask 
of us, to do our job and do it professionally. So again, myself as 
House Leader, I want to thank everybody for the work that 
made this session the way it was. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member opposite to make a few remarks, if that’s okay. The 
Government House Leader did a tremendous job of the thank 
yous that he’s already provided so I will make mine a bit more 
brief. 
 
As was mentioned, Mr. Speaker, by the Government House 
Leader, there’s a lot of folks here this session that are quite new 
in their roles: the two leaders, the Government House Leader, 
and yourself and myself. So I have a lot of people to thank for 
teaching me and allowing me to grow in this role and frankly 
putting up with me while I learned through bumps along the 
road. 
 
The first folks I want to thank are the Clerks for their wisdom 
and guidance in trying to make sure that I didn’t step in too 
many potholes, including today, Mr. Speaker. I also didn’t 
know that completion day you can’t have petitions. So even as 
recently as today, I always thank them for their wisdom and 
their knowledge in trying to keep us on the right course. 
 
And as was mentioned by the Government House Leader, I also 
want to thank the committee staff and the committee Clerks for 
their hard work, again in making sure that all of us don’t step in 
too many potholes and that we all do the work that we’re 
supposed to be doing and actually get the actual procedural 
things that we need to do done correctly. And as had been 
mentioned, they work very long hours, you know, for the glory 
that they get in those roles. So we thank them very much for 
frankly putting up with all of us and helping us do the work that 
we need to do. 
 
I also want to thank the Sergeant-at-Arms and his team for 
keeping us safe and keeping us going, again a group of folks 
who work long hours. While we’re sitting here, they’re here too 
doing the work that needs to be done to make sure that we’re all 
here. 
 
I also want to thank the House Leader on the other side, the 
Government House Leader. It’s been a great opportunity to get 
to know him a bit better. I think we make an unlikely pair, but 
it’s worked really well. He calls himself a rookie in the role, 
Mr. Speaker, but he has a wealth of experience both on the 
government side as well as the opposition side, and that’s really 
helped to . . . that perspective has really helped this whole 

operation to run as smoothly as I feel it has. And I’ve had the 
opportunity to lean on him in his wisdom and his perspective 
has been so great and much appreciated. 
 
You sort of . . . and I know that my colleague, the Deputy 
House Leader, talks about this often, that when you go through 
this, even though you’re on different sides of the House, you get 
this sort of bond with each other because you’re walking 
through a fire together. Even though you might be dealing with 
different colleagues and different issues, you really don’t 
experience anything else like it, and it’s really only the person 
who’s opposite from you that understands what had to be done 
behind the scenes to make sure that we did our job. So very 
much I want to thank him for his work in his role. It’s been a 
great opportunity. 
 
That also gives me the opportunity to thank my colleague 
sitting next to me, the Deputy House Leader on my side. He’s 
been a wisdom of knowledge or a wealth or knowledge . . . a 
well of wisdom is what I’ve been saying lately. But also ever 
since I started, ever since I became elected, Mr. Speaker — not 
just when I stepped into this role — he’s taken me under his 
wing and has been a huge mentor to me and is a large part of 
my growth as an MLA and as a legislator, Mr. Speaker. And 
lucky for me, he continues to put up with me and also provides 
some good humour along the way. He’s a pretty awesome 
seatmate, Mr. Speaker, especially during question period. So I 
very much want to thank him for what he’s done. 
 
I also want to thank the Legislative Assembly staff and the 
building staff, the cleaners, our staff in the cafeteria, everybody 
behind the scenes, everybody that’s working in different 
ministries as well as political staff, for all of the work that they 
do as well behind the scenes in keeping everything running and 
keeping us going smoothly. I want to thank the Pages for their 
work this session. They’ve done an absolutely tremendous job. 
 
And I also want to thank you, Mr. Speaker. You’ve done a 
fantastic job stepping into a new role. As you’ve learned — and 
as I’ve learned, too — these roles, you have to learn quickly. 
It’s a sink-or-swim sort of scenario, and I think you’ve done a 
phenomenal job, Mr. Speaker, not too much sinking at all, Mr. 
Speaker. You’ve done a fantastic job and it’s great to see you 
grow in this role as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also want to thank . . . Actually I want to thank Jarret on the 
government side. He’s done a great job. And on my side I want 
to thank Melissa Bendig who’s already been mentioned, is 
moving on to work in Alberta. The two of them have been 
working really well together and they help us, myself and the 
Government House Leader, look better than we probably would 
look without their service and leadership. 
 
And they worked really hard to make sure that we got done 
what we needed to get done, in particular when the power went 
out, Mr. Speaker, and the last-minute scrambling that had to 
happen to make sure we got all our time in for estimates. It’s a 
lot of work and it’s a lot of back and forth, and it’s actually a lot 
of accommodation of both sides to make sure that we get done 
what we need to do. And the folks out there don’t necessarily 
see how often we all work together to make sure that we get 
done the government work that we need to get done. 
 



4456 Saskatchewan Hansard May 31, 2018 

I also want to thank the constituency assistants and all of the 
folks that help support us when we’re away, including our 
families, Mr. Speaker. They’re an integral part to the work we 
do, frankly. I also want to thank Hansard for their work, being 
here when debate is exciting and being here when debate is not 
so exciting. They’re always here and they’re always listening 
and we always appreciate it. 
 
And as had been mentioned, I want to thank the media for their 
hard work. They also work long hours and have to deal with 
files that can sometimes be very difficult to deal with. And in 
particular what was mentioned by the Government House 
Leader was the Humboldt tragedy. Often they’re at the front 
lines of dealing with folks who are in tragic situations and 
seeing some pretty awful things, but have to do the work that 
they do. And I want to commend them for that work as well. 
 
I hope I haven’t forgotten anybody. That was all I had on my 
list. I want to thank . . . I just want to thank everybody for all 
their work this session, and colleagues on this side of the House 
and on that side of the House for everything that was done. It 
can feel really feisty and really hot in here at times, Mr. 
Speaker, but we all are here to serve the role that we serve. And 
I think it’s been done with honour and respect, Mr. Speaker, so 
thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I think it’s left with me. I’d like to request 
leave for my comments. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I asked for it, yes. Again, I’ve got a few 
comments to make myself but thanks for the leave. But I would 
like to thank everybody for your hard work this session. You 
have, both sides, you’ve put in the time; you’ve put in the 
effort, and I believe the people of this province are well served. 
And you should congratulate yourselves for that. I believe the 
people of this province are well served by your efforts. Again, 
your constituents should also be proud of your work. 
 
I’d like to thank everyone — on your behalf and my behalf — 
everybody that supports us. In my case I’d like to thank Lisa. I 
wouldn’t be able to do any of this without your support. But 
every single one of us has people behind us and you’ve all 
recognized them at different times. They deserve that. We 
wouldn’t be here though without them. 
 
I pondered about what I’d say in regards to what this role as 
Speaker has been like for the last two and a half months. And 
sure, a lot’s been made about the hat. Yes, the hat. I get it. Yes, 
I was there. But I have learned a lot. I’ve made plenty of 
mistakes. I think we all have at different times but I’ve noticed 
that especially on the House leaders’ side, they’ve given me 
some leeway and we’ve worked together. And I’ll get back to 
that. 
 
And I’ve wanted this place to be a place of honour, to be better, 
and for all of us to be better. And I think we are. People of this 
province: these members are here for the right reasons and you 
need to know that. 
 
What have I learned? Trust this Table — trust the Clerk’s 
Table. I’ve been tasked with moving, apparently nimbly . . . 

well not so nimbly, patiently. But they’ve given me nothing but 
guidance and wisdom. And knowing full well, they turn around 
and they look at me; it’s yeah, get it together now. And I’ve 
learned from that. But thanks for subtly and not so subtly 
making sure that I stay on task. So Ken, Greg, Iris, and Kathy, 
you might be the best in the country. I have no idea, but you’re 
amazing. And you deserve that. You might be. You deserve it. 
You’re pretty darned good. 
 
My office staff, Sheila, Hayley, and Stephen: thank you for 
your immeasurable patience when I ask, why do we do it like 
that? Am I supposed to do that? Regardless you just nod your 
head and you get me on task. Thank you. 
 
I’d also like to thank my CA, Kristy. Thanks for your seamless 
transition into liaising with my office and making sure again 
that I stay on task. 
 
I’ve also learned a couple of other things. This place can get 
loud and members sure want to make sure that I understand the 
rules. And it’s nice when you yell from both sides at the same 
time and you have slightly different opinions, and I hear 
nothing, but actually your personal interpretation of the rules 
are fascinating. In the future, thanks but no thanks. 
 
I also now know that the terms “request leave for extended 
introduction” and “while I’m on my feet” are terms reserved for 
the space-time continuum and are based on a stardate. You get 
enveloped into this weightless, timeless black hole “while I’m 
on my feet” and whoops, out comes a Star Trek tricorder and 
you just go off into some direction for as long as you want to 
talk. And I go, well awesome, tricorders, yes. 
 
[11:15] 
 
The Pages. Oh yes, we’re ready. Nengi Allison, Sherrilyn 
Bzdel, Jessica Fahlman, Paige McAlpin, and Kaylen Merasty, 
you’ve done an amazing job and . . . 
 
[Applause] 
 
The Speaker: — Yes, you have been awesome. And with that 
it’ll be one quick, one, two, three . . . Thanks for laughing at my 
jokes and not the Minister of Social Services’ because he’s not 
that funny. 
 
Again, House leaders, I’d like to again thank you. You’ve done 
an admirable job and you’ve made this place better. Thanks for 
that. Mr. Premier, Leader of the Opposition, you’ve done really, 
really well this session. I commend you for not only the debate 
but keeping things respectful. And you’ve done well. Both of 
you have done very well and I think the people of this province 
again are well served. 
 
Hansard, yes. I don’t know how many times I’ve looked in and 
read whatever I might have said and I’d say, I think that’s what 
I said. And we’ve changed it. And thank you for your efforts. 
It’s a moving target in here. 
 
Legislative Assembly staff. Sergeant-at-Arms, thank you, sir. 
I’ve enjoyed walking behind you every single day. Thanks for 
your wisdom. Thanks for your efforts and thanks for keeping 
this place exactly the way we want it — secure. 



May 31, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4457 

Monique, House services, building staff — thank you again for 
all of your efforts. We can’t do this without you. 
 
And I’ll leave it with the media, thanks for everything that 
you’ve done. I’m not sure who’s up there still. And just so 
we’re clear, the dress code stands. I look forward to your 
impassioned pleas. You’re looking for pants leniency; we’ll see. 
Pants leniency, okay. Pants leniency, eh? We’ll continue with 
that. 
 
But I’ll leave you with this. We represent all of our constituents 
— all of them, every single one of them. Let’s continue to 
serve. Thanks for everything. Enjoy your summers. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that this House be now adjourned. The pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned to 
the call of the Chair. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 11:18.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4445 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4445 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4445 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4445 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4446 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4446 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4446 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4446 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 June is Pride Season 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4446 
 Remembering Tony Day 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4446 
 Constituent Receives Protective Services Medal 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4447 
 Saskatchewan Industrial and Mining Suppliers Association’s Annual General Meeting 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4447 
 Foster Parenting Initiative 
  Goudy ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4447 
 Ecology Class Wins Agriculture Grant 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4448 
 Opposition’s Performance 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4448 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 United States Government Imposing Tariffs on Canadian Steel 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4448 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4448 
 Shared Priorities of Government and Opposition 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4448 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4449 
 Former Member and Activities in China 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4449 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4450 
 Funding for Classroom Supports 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4450 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4450 
 Housing Navigator Position and Rental Housing Supplement 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4451 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4451 
 Wait Times in Hospital Emergency Rooms 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4452 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4452 
 State of Provincial Economy 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4452 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4453 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4453 
MOTIONS 
 House Adjournment 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4453 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Expressions of Thanks 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4454 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4455 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4456 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


