


















































April 16, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 42A  MONDAY, APRIL 16, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3795 
 April 16, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s my honour to introduce a large group that’s 
with us here today: two classes, grades 6 and 7, from Lakeview 
School here today. They’re not very far from their school here 
today. But it’s a pleasure have them here. They can give us a 
wave. They’re joined here by their teachers today, Jared Clarke 
and Rochelle Anderson. We welcome them to their Assembly. 
 
I also want to recognize that a group of these students, about 
half of them, were involved in leading a climate conversation 
throughout this year and for a period of time. I had the privilege 
of being over on December 5th, I believe, to Lakeview School 
to watch these young, inspiring leaders of today and for 
tomorrow lead us in a very important climate conversation. 
They engaged many from within our community. It was packed. 
It was filled within that gymnasium there that night. 
 
I’m bringing the greeting here today on behalf of their MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly], the MLA for Regina 
Lakeview, who sends her best and her thanks for your 
leadership. She’s looking forward to coming by the school once 
again very soon. 
 
I also want to single out Jared Clarke, one of their teachers 
who’s a real leader within our province. He’s a climate leader. 
He’s a farmer within the constituency of Indian 
Head-Milestone. He’s a biologist, a teacher of course. The 
Prairie Naturalist is his title on CJTR, and he’s somebody that 
offers our province real, important leadership as he leads an 
important conversation around climate change. He’s a hunter 
and a fisher and all-around good guy, and somebody that I’m 
happy to count as a friend, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d also identify that Jared is holding a conversation on climate 
change tonight at 7:30 at the Royal Saskatchewan Museum, and 
certainly members on both sides of the Assembly are invited, 
and all within the public. But it’s my honour to welcome these 
55 students, these two very fine teachers to their Assembly here 
today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — We’re okay with one, one introduction. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition to 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to provide trapping 
licence exemptions for residents 65 years or older, that trappers 
are a very important group of people that maintain traditional 
values in Saskatchewan, that the fur-harvesting industry 
provides many economic benefits to the province. The province 

has exemptions for fishing licences for residents over 65 years 
or older, but there are no age exemptions for trappers yet.  
 
The prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to immediately show their 
support for Saskatchewan trappers and provide a trapping 
licence exemption for Saskatchewan residents over 65 
years of age. 

 
It is signed by many good trappers of northern Saskatchewan 
and the rest of the province. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan.  
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Frontier, 
Climax, and Claydon. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. And 
the people signing this petition want to bring to our attention the 
following: that Saskatchewan’s outdated election Act allows 
corporations and unions and individuals, even those outside the 
province, to make unlimited donations to our province’s 
political parties. And we know that the people of Saskatchewan 
deserve to live in a fair province where all voices are equal and 
money cannot buy or influence politics. And we know that over 
the past 10 years, the Saskatchewan Party has received $12.61 
million in corporate donations, and of that, $2.87 million come 
from companies outside Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan politics should 
belong to Saskatchewan people. And we know the federal 
government, the provinces of Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, Nova 
Scotia, and now British Columbia have moved to limit this 
influence and level the playing field by banning corporate and 
union donations to political parties.  
 
I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign finance laws, 
to end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 



3796 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 
on individual donations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
calling on the government to recognize the importance of 
non-profit child care centres. These citizens wish to bring to 
your attention: across Saskatchewan, licensed non-profit child 
care centres are taxed inconsistently. Many of our licensed 
non-profit child care centres pay commercial property taxes. 
Child care is essential to the economy, yet most centres struggle 
to balance their budgets. Quality child care has an enormous 
positive impact on a child’s future outcomes, and yields high 
rates of economic return. And child care centres are institutions 
of early learning and child care development. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in the Saskatchewan education Act and 
exempt all licensed non-profit child care centres from 
Saskatchewan property tax through changes to the 
appropriate legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by residents from Regina. I do so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to stand in my place to present a petition around the drug 
Orkambi. Whereas Orkambi is the first drug to treat the basic 
defect in the largest population of Canadians with cystic 
fibrosis, Mr. Speaker, Orkambi can slow disease progression, 
allowing patients to live longer, healthier lives. So the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Urge the Ministry of Health to negotiate a fair price for 
Orkambi and to make it available through the 
Saskatchewan drug plan for those who meet the conditions 
set out by Health Canada and the clinical criteria 
established by the Canadian CF clinicians. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
from all throughout Saskatchewan, and throughout Canada as a 
matter of fact, Mr. Speaker. And in fact they have an online 
petition going as well. But the people who have signed this 
petition that I’m . . . the page that I’m presenting today are 
primarily from Saskatoon. And I so proudly present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Political Studies Student Receives Vera Pezer Award  
for Student Enhancement 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’m honoured 
to recognize a constituent of mine, Kirsten Samson, who 
recently received the Vera Pezer Award for Student 
Enhancement, volunteerism, at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Kirsten is a third-year political science student at the University 
of Saskatchewan and is a leader among the student body, but 
also in the broader Saskatoon community. She is the executive 
secretary of the Political Studies Students’ Association and has 
served as a peer mentor at the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan]. After finishing her undergraduate studies, 
Kirsten hopes to study law with a focus on human rights. She 
hopes to work to address social issues that affect many people 
in Saskatoon and across the province, including the enhanced 
availability of low-income housing and racial and gender 
violence and discrimination. 
 
The USSU [University of Saskatchewan Students’ Union] 
Experience in Excellence Awards recognize and show 
appreciation for those individuals who go above and beyond in 
improving the experiences of U of S students, faculty, and staff. 
Kirsten has been recognized for her leadership qualities and 
volunteerism that improves both the academic and 
non-academic environment at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask that all members join me in congratulating Kirsten on her 
leadership award and wish her all the best in completing her 
studies and the pursuit of social and economic justice for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Night With STARS Gala 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this past weekend I had the pleasure of attending the 
Night with STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] Gala 
along with the members from Regina Wascana Plains, Moose 
Jaw Wakamow, and from Meadow Lake. The Night with 
STARS Gala is an annual fundraising event with all proceeds 
assisting STARS in providing life-saving support across our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since its inception in 2012, our government has 
been a proud partner and supporter of STARS and the valuable 
work the STARS team does in our province. Since that time, 
STARS has transported or provided care to more than 3,650 
patients in hundreds of communities right across Saskatchewan. 
Continued government funding for STARS, along with the 
generous financial support from businesses and families within 
our province, helps ensure these services will always be here for 
our residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Humboldt Broncos bus accident was a stark 
reminder of the important and valuable work that STARS does 
to save lives in our communities. This is a service we never 
want to have to use, but we are grateful to have STARS and 
their team during our most difficult times. 
 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3797 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this Assembly, I’d like to take a 
moment to thank STARS and all the first responders and pilots 
for the incredible and courageous work they do in our province 
each and every day. Thank you to everyone who attended the 
STARS gala to help raise money for their valuable efforts 
across our community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Support for National Pharmacare Program 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, last Saturday was World Health 
Day and the World Heath Organization called on leaders around 
the world to commit to universal health coverage. In Canada 
we’re fortunate to have a health care system where citizens 
don’t have to worry about whether they’ll be able to pay when 
they need to access emergency care or have medical procedures. 
But there are gaps in this coverage, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We live in the only country that has universal health coverage 
that doesn’t include prescription drugs, and this lack of 
coverage costs Canadians billions of dollars a year. We pay the 
highest prices in the world for generic drugs, second-highest 
prices for brand name drugs. And when people with chronic 
illnesses skip their medication to pay their rent, their health 
suffers, hospital visits increase, and costs to the health care 
system skyrocket. Universal drug coverage would save 
Canadians over $7 billion. 
 
Now the Sask Party has cut programs that made prescription 
drugs more affordable for seniors and children, ostensibly to 
save money. We heard a couple of weeks ago that the Sask 
Party wasn’t sure whether they supported a national pharmacare 
program, and it’s unclear to me what part of a national 
pharmacare program they wouldn’t like. Is it the part where the 
province saves money, the part where Saskatchewan patients 
save money? Is it the part where health outcomes are improved 
and lives are saved, Mr. Speaker, because when we have people 
choosing between paying their rent and paying for their 
medications, they don’t have what they need to stay healthy.  
 
We hope that this Premier will see the light and join us in the 
common sense call for a national pharmacare plan because it’s a 
smart response to a costly problem. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Rotary Badge Shield Star Dinner and Citizen Awards 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 12th I had 
the pleasure of attending the 2018 Rotary Badge Shield Star 
Dinner and Citizen Awards at Prairieland Park, along with the 
Attorney General. This event was organized by the Saskatoon 
Rotary Clubs, Saskatoon Police Service, Saskatoon Fire 
Department, and Medavie Health Services to celebrate the 
unique contributions made by the women and men involved in 
these services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the keynote speaker for this event was Kevin 
Lamoureux who, among other roles, is currently serving as the 
education lead for the National Centre for Truth and 
Reconciliation. Mr. Lamoureux spoke eloquently about the 

importance of truth and reconciliation and how education plays 
a vital role. The event also awards citizens for important 
contributions. This year, Heather Miller was awarded the Badge 
Award, Janet Barnes won the Shield Award, and Hayley Hassel 
won the Star Award. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, important words and heroic actions make this 
event the largest Rotary event in Saskatoon, attracting nearly 
800 attendees. Ticket sales raised proceeds to support the 
restorative action program through the Saskatoon Rotary Clubs. 
On behalf of the entire Assembly, I want to congratulate all 
award winners and those involved in the event for putting on 
another successful fundraiser. And thank you to first responders 
across the province for the extraordinary work they do. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

Ability in Me Fundraiser Dinner 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on March 24th I, along with the Minister of Social Services and 
the member from Saskatoon University, had the privilege of 
attending Dine for a Difference, a fundraiser dinner for Ability 
in Me or AIM. 
 
AIM is a charity that provides specialized education 
programming for people with Down syndrome and their 
families. Tickets for the event were sold out. The goal of these 
programs is to enable the support and inclusion of individuals 
with Down syndrome all across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is focused on several priorities 
that will improve the lives of people with disabilities. The 
Saskatchewan disability strategy is our 10-year framework for 
creating a more welcoming, innovative, and inclusive province 
for all residents. And we continue to work on priorities such as 
housing, supports for children, employment opportunities, and 
accessibility. But, Mr. Speaker, we cannot do it on our own. 
Organizations like AIM that do so much good for so many 
across our province are crucial and assist us in achieving our 
goals. 
 
On behalf of everyone in this Assembly, I’d like to thank AIM 
staff and all the volunteers for putting on such a successful 
dinner and for providing programming that is making a 
significant difference for so many families across this province. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation Annual Convention 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Volunteers 
from across the province convened in Prince Albert to discuss 
the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation goals and objectives at 
their 89th annual convention. 
 
Thank you to convention chair, Ken Cantin, for his role in a 
great weekend with speakers and delegates. The theme of this 



3798 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

year’s convention was Habitat Trust: Your Land — Your 
Legacy. A variety of topics were discussed, including land 
access, hunting restrictions, and firearms legislation, which 
allowed for the federation’s members to have their voices heard 
and share ideas going forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, fishing, trapping, hunting, shooting sports, and 
wildlife-orientated activities have been among this province’s 
most popular pastimes since before Saskatchewan’s inception. 
Wildlife conservation and habitat form the background of our 
province’s culture, history, and economy. 
 
The Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation contributes throughout 
the province to charitable projects, children’s initiatives, hunter 
safety education, and responsible, sustainable fishing. 
Responsible, caring stewards of the land are not born that way; 
they are developed through the hard work and experience that 
the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation advocates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking all the 
members for the annual convention for their dedication and 
commitment. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 

Community Production of Broadway Musical 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In early 
March, the Langenburg Arts Council successfully produced 
four showings of Chicago: The Musical to sold-out crowds, 
which I was a member of.  
 
Based on the original 1926 Broadway play, Chicago is a major 
musical production including trained vocalists, advanced 
choreography, extravagant costumes, professional lighting, and 
a live six-member orchestra. Chicago was produced by Denise 
Dobko, musical direction by Shannon McIntyre, vocal direction 
by Rob Zerr, and choreography from Tammy Kostersky. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rigorous rehearsals began last October for the 21 
cast members, who range in age from grade 12 students to a 
couple of grandmothers. All cast members were dedicated to 
the success of the show, each putting in over 100 hours of 
individual practice time. Mr. Speaker, they all hit their marks 
precisely. 
 
The backbone of the production were the six members of the 
orchestra who did an exceptional job, so well in fact that the 
audience could hardly notice their smooth and timely presence. 
Anyone in the audience would agree that the show was 
excellent in all aspects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating the Langenburg Arts Council and the local talent 
who dedicated their time to providing exceptional entertainment 
to the area, as I understand it will be a very tough act to follow.  
 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Okay. We’re looking forward to a spirited but 
respectful question period, and that’s where we’re at. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Response to Opioid Crisis 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week we pointed 
out that the 2018 budget did not allocate any new funding for or 
even mention the fentanyl and opioid crisis, despite a growing 
number of overdose deaths in rural and urban communities. The 
Premier since said that the government will expand the 
naloxone program, which is a welcome shift that we have been 
calling for. But it’s just one measure among the many that are 
needed to address this crisis. 
 
So my question is, did the government forget about the opioid 
crisis as it was putting together its budget? And what is the 
government’s plan to address the rising number of overdoses 
from fentanyl and opioids? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And I thank the member opposite for a question that is 
important to communities across the province of Saskatchewan 
— I think, in fairness, across the nation of Canada as well — as 
we struggle as leaders across Canada with the introduction of 
opioids and most certainly the results from the usage of these 
drugs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this province we have introduced $50,000 in 
our funding to ensure that those that are at highest risk of 
experiencing exposure to opioids, whether they be in our first 
responders, in our police forces, or people that are utilizing the 
product themselves, Mr. Speaker, have access to the naloxone 
kits as well as the training to utilize those kits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve expanded that to some of our first-line providers, Mr. 
Speaker, some of our community-based organizations, Mr. 
Speaker, so they have access as well. And we’ll have further 
expansions in the days ahead that we’ll announce to those 
around those that may be in contact as well, Mr. Speaker, all 
with the eye to ensure that we have trained individuals across 
this province with access to the naloxone kits so that we can 
save lives in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Something that has 
been missing from this discussion is an announcement that was 
made about 11 months ago where the government announced 
the creation of a task force to address fentanyl and opioid deaths 
in the province. At the time, a member of the task force, Dr. 
Peter Butt, he said that this work would be difficult without 
funding for that task force, but its formation was a good first 
step. 
 
Unfortunately we haven’t seen a second step but only more 
steps backwards. It’s the last we’ve heard about this task force, 
Mr. Speaker. It has yet to report publicly, hasn’t been 
mentioned at all in recent weeks, and certainly didn’t appear 
anywhere in this year’s budget. What is the status of this 
government’s promised task force? Has it issued any 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3799 

recommendations? What action has it taken, and what actions 
have been taken based on any recommendations given? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan drug task force was established to improve 
information sharing for those stakeholders and better 
coordinator responses to these emerging drug trends and the 
issues associated, and to also inform some of our stakeholders 
as to what’s the best way to get some of these supports, 
naloxone kits and others, to our first responders and family 
members that are affected by this terrible problem that we do 
have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to point out that we have invested well over $275,000 
additional to the prescription drug review, because it’s not only 
about treating the issue and finding treatment and supports for 
these people. It’s also about being preventative, that we can 
track some of these prescriptions more closely to make sure that 
a lot of the issues that we’re seeing aren’t because of 
overprescribing or misprescribing of these drugs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also I want to point out as well, well over half a million dollars 
to 28 different harm-reduction programs across Saskatchewan 
too. As these individuals come in for their clean needles, they 
can access programming that way as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government Action on Announced Initiatives 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, it’s hard not to see a pattern 
forming here. Whether it’s the forgotten and unfunded fentanyl 
task force, the poverty reduction strategy that the government 
announced and then did nothing with, the mental health action 
plan that had no action and no plan, their promise to get to 50 
per cent renewables without any investments to actually achieve 
that goal, this government seems to have a really hard time 
following through on the announcements that it makes. 
 
As one former member of this Assembly liked to say, the best 
predictor of future behaviour is past performance. How can the 
government expect the people of Saskatchewan to take this 
government at its word when its words are so rarely followed 
by action? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I’m just a little unsure of a 
specific question in there. I heard a few comments, Mr. 
Speaker. Maybe we could change this to comment period rather 
than question period, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But maybe I will comment with respect to the plan that the 
province has when it comes to climate change and it comes to 
our goal in this province of a 50 per cent renewable mix in our 
SaskPower generation mix, Mr. Speaker, resulting in a 40 per 
cent emission reduction — 10 per cent in addition to Canada’s 
commitment at the Paris accord — in our power electrical 
generation sources here in this province, Mr. Speaker. A 
reduction of 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

I would point the members opposite and the people of the 
province to our plan for a prairie resilience here in the province 
of Saskatchewan that has been worked on through different 
plenary sessions with industry, Mr. Speaker, the electrical 
generation industry as well as other industries that are operating 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What this province does not have a plan for, Mr. Speaker, as 
long as the Saskatchewan Party government is at the helm — 
unlike the members opposite, unlike the NDP [New Democratic 
Party] — is to never have a carbon tax on industries and the 
families in this great province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Global Transportation Hub 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this government has made 
choices to take supports away from the most vulnerable, to cut 
training opportunities for workers, and to cut funding from 
climate change efforts. All the while, they continue to prop up 
the GTH [Global Transportation Hub] with hundreds of 
millions of taxpayers’ monies. And, Mr. Speaker, of course jobs 
at Loblaw are important, but we’re talking about their 
management at the Global Transportation Hub Authority and 
the huge empty footprint that is costing taxpayers dearly. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to tour Loblaw with the minister. 
But the last time I was out at the GTH, I toured empty lands 
with blowing tumbleweeds, and that empty land at the GTH 
employs no one. So I’ll ask again: how can the Sask Party 
continue to prop up the GTH with taxpayers’ monies while they 
cut funding to our kids’ classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, this is a generational 
investment. It will take some time to fill up. If the member 
opposite . . . Well the members opposite don’t seem to want to 
hear; they seem to enjoy chirping more than understanding what 
is really taking place out there. And, Mr. Speaker, that says a lot 
about what kind of people we have on that side of the House 
because, Mr. Speaker, out there we have facilities that are 
employing hundreds and hundreds of people. We also have 
Emterra out there, a recycling facility that does the recycling for 
the city of Regina. And if she had chosen to go out to the far 
end of the facility, she would have seen that, but she chose not 
to. It was easier to come here and do it. 
 
Early this morning when I came in, I left a message on her 
cellphone saying, can I arrange a tour for you this week? And 
I’m going to leave the same message again tomorrow. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Emissions Reduction and Renewable Energy 
 
Ms. Sproule: — It’s already arranged, Mr. Speaker, so the 
minister isn’t obviously aware of that. But before he casts 
aspersions on this side of the House, the minister should maybe 
check in with the Minister of Education and current Deputy 



3800 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

Premier what he thinks about their GTH scandal. Or maybe the 
minister responsible for immigration and trade, who once 
admitted the facts and even their own opinions matter less than 
what they’ve told to say by the staff in the backroom, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But that’s just the way it is with the Sask Party, who are never 
clear or upfront with the taxpayers of this province about any of 
their pet projects — for example, carbon capture, Mr. Speaker. 
We haven’t been able to get a straight answer about carbon 
capture at BD4 [Boundary dam 4] and 5, even though 
SaskPower was making their decision in December. So with no 
money in the budget for a retrofit at Boundary dam 4 and 5, can 
we assume that when it comes to carbon capture, utilization, 
and sequestration, the Sask Party has finally waved the white 
flag and conceded that their $1.6 billion experiment doesn’t 
make sense for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, there is only one party in 
this province waving the white flag, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the 
members opposite, the members opposite who say we should 
just give up; we should just accept the carbon tax from the 
federal government or put in our own carbon tax, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what the members opposite have to say on that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, carbon capture and sequestration is obviously an 
important part of not just Saskatchewan’s emissions picture, it’s 
a part of the global emissions picture. That’s why the United 
Nations IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] 
indicates that a 2-degree reduction in global temperatures is not 
feasible or realistic without carbon capture and sequestration. 
 
That’s why we need to ensure that we’re demonstrating this 
technology. That’s why we see interest from around the world 
of what’s happening here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s why we have seen 2 million tonnes of emissions reduced 
and sequestered safely underground and further enhancing oil 
recovery in the province of Saskatchewan, which benefits, 
obviously, the people of Saskatchewan through those revenues, 
Mr. Speaker. So this is an important part of the picture not only 
for SaskPower, not only for the Government of Saskatchewan, 
the people of Saskatchewan, but the entire world. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Well, Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of our 
guests today, I think we can understand why this is called 
question period and not answer period, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For years the Sask Party has clung to carbon capture, spending 
hundreds of millions of dollars promoting it around the world, 
knowing that Saskatchewan ratepayers would never make their 
money back. The Saskatchewan Party has been recklessly bent 
on promoting CCS [carbon capture and storage], pouring 
money into a project that only works 60 per cent of the time, 
and they have failed to plan for Saskatchewan’s future. 
 
They promised years ago to reach 50 per cent renewable power 

generation by 2030, but we’ve seen next to no action, Mr. 
Speaker. We asked, but they were never able to tell us how they 
would get to that target. So does the Sask Party have a plan to 
meet their targets, or is that to be determined like the rest of 
their plans? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we plan to add 60 megawatts of solar generation by 
2021 through competitive procurement partnerships with First 
Nations Power Authority and communities across the province. 
We are launching, or have launched, a competitive process to 
buy up to 200 megawatts of wind generation from independent 
power producers. We’ve signed a power purchase agreement 
with Deep Earth Energy Production Corp. to allow for research 
into Saskatchewan’s first geothermal project. And, Mr. Speaker, 
SaskPower’s also engaged with industry on a new flare gas 
power generation project that came into operation in September 
of 2017. The goal is to add up to 750 kilowatts to 
Saskatchewan’s power grid. 
 
These are just a number of ways that we are going to reach our 
target of 50 per cent capacity through renewables by 2030, Mr. 
Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, the best news of all is the bulk of 
our work is going to be done through contracting through the 
private independent power producers who have an interest in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s the way that we think that 
we should proceed in this and that’s the way that we will 
proceed through to 2030 and beyond. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this government has proven time 
and time again that they are unserious about climate change. 
And again in this budget, Mr. Speaker, they are failing the 
people of Saskatchewan by refusing to take action on climate 
change, one of the greatest challenges facing our provinces.  
 
They cut $719,000 in the climate change branch — 18 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s an 80 per cent cut since 2012. And this 
government is moving backwards. It undermines what little 
credibility they might have had when it comes to climate 
change. In fact that lack of credibility has cost our province $62 
million in federal climate change funding. My question is, when 
will this government take the environmental challenges of our 
province seriously and reverse the cuts to the climate change 
branch? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, you want to know another percentage? A 70 per cent 
increase in carbon dioxide emissions when the members 
opposite were the Government of Saskatchewan. Where was 
their plan? Where were their reductions? Nothing but increase 
in greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, through prairie resilience, our 
made-in-Saskatchewan plan, Mr. Speaker, we will see a 
reduction of 40 to 45 per cent reduction in methane emissions in 
our oil industry, Mr. Speaker. Would the members opposite 
propose we go further than that? Do they propose we go further 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3801 

than a 45 per cent reduction in methane? 
 
Mr. Speaker, on electricity, which I just already answered in the 
previous answer, a 50 per cent move to capacity from 
renewables, which will see a 40 per cent reduction, including 
using CCS at Boundary dam 3, Mr. Speaker. Would the 
members opposite go beyond that? Would they go beyond a 40 
per cent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from our 
electricity? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have seen an incredible story when it 
comes to agriculture through innovation and technology in this 
province, moving from 600 000 tonnes emitted in 1991 through 
our cropland to now sequestering 12 million tonnes on an 
annual basis. Would the members opposite go further than that 
when it comes to agriculture? Would they tax the ag industry in 
our province? What would their plan be? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, a good start would be fill in the 
TBDs [to be determined]. Mr. Speaker, this government does 
not understand the dire need to make environmental 
sustainability affordable. It’s clear, Mr. Speaker, that they are 
happy to make Saskatchewan families pay for their 
unwillingness to take action. On top of cutting the climate 
change branch, this budget also removes exemptions from 
energy-efficient appliances. And again, they continue to 
undermine what little credibility they’ve had on the climate 
change file. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is trying to cut corners and pinch 
pennies on the back of Saskatchewan families with no apparent 
plan to create incentives for families to make their homes more 
energy efficient. Instead of raising the mission accomplished 
flag, Mr. Speaker, what initiatives will this government take on 
to make it more affordable for families to make their homes 
more energy efficient? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well you know what won’t help families across this province, 
Mr. Speaker? What won’t help families across this province is 
imposing a carbon tax, which is what the members opposite are 
advocating for. We just give up; we wave the white flag and we 
accept the carbon tax from the federal government, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s not going to get it done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite will know that in terms of 
the PST [provincial sales tax] exemption on energy-efficient 
appliances, this was a program that was created across the 
country at a time when very few products were energy efficient. 
And so the point was to encourage people, when making a 
decision between an energy-efficient appliance and one that 
wasn’t energy efficient, to make that choice, that 
energy-efficient choice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member opposite will know that today you go to look for 
an appliance, you cannot I believe find any products, appliances 
that are no longer . . . not energy efficient. So as every other 
province has done, we have sunsetted that program, Mr. 
Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, what we’re doing is prairie 

resilience. We’re going to see a reduction in greenhouse gas 
emissions without imposing a carbon tax on our people. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Funding for Post-Secondary Education 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s attacks on 
our universities and students are putting post-secondary 
education out of reach, out of more and more within this 
province, shutting out young people across our province. This 
year’s 4.8 per cent increase in tuition at the U of S is a direct 
result of the devastating cuts by the Sask Party last year, the 
ones that they plowed ahead with. 
 
And with this budget, they’re making things worse, not better. 
On top of the failure to reverse the cuts that they brought in last 
year and repair the damage, this year’s budget cuts $12.6 
million from student supports, including a cut of $5 million 
from the Student Aid Fund. How can the Sask Party cut 
supports that increase accessibility, when we have the least 
accessible tuition rate in Western Canada? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Well I want to thank the 
member opposite for the question, Mr. Speaker. Of course the 
changes that he’s referring to, to the student supports that were 
done that were reflected in this budget, are a result of changes 
that we made last year. 
 
One of those changes, Mr. Speaker, was to defer the 
Saskatchewan advantage grants for education savings, which is 
annualized into this year’s savings part of the budget, Mr. 
Speaker. And the other part of that comes from the student loan 
fund, where we made changes last year so that we would 
provide upfront funding to students who are attending 
university, particularly low-income students, Mr. Speaker, so 
that they would have predictable funding through the course of 
their education. 
 
As we can see with the enrolment levels of both not only at the 
University of Regina but also the enrolment levels of First 
Nations and Métis students across all of our institutions, Mr. 
Speaker, we have created a system where we’ve been funding 
our universities and helping grow the province for young people 
in this province, including our graduate retention program, 
which I talked to last day, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, students, post-secondary 
students across Saskatchewan deserve so much better than 
they’re getting from this Sask Party government — students 
like the U of R [University of Regina] social work students up 
in Saskatoon. These students are rightly concerned that their 
classes that they need to complete their program in a timely way 
are no longer offered. They’ve been cut. And they’re concerned 
that their accreditation is at risk because of the Sask Party’s 
cuts. We’re talking about the next generation of social work — 
those that we need to extend hope and support all across our 
province. 



3802 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

Will the minister guarantee these students that they’ll be able to 
finish their program on time, and will she reverse the cuts from 
last year’s budget that have put this critical program at risk? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again I 
thank the member opposite for the question, and I thank the 
social work students for raising this issue for our attention. It is 
of course an issue which we will work very closely with the 
universities on, in order to make sure that their planning for 
programs and services are such that these students can graduate 
in a timely fashion. That’s ongoing work. That’s work that the 
autonomous institutions have under their purview, but certainly 
we are happy to work with them and the boards of governors to 
make sure that’s the case. 
 
But while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about 
not only the investments that we’ve been making in education, 
but also in the sense of the future investments that we’re 
making. You know, the Finance critic last day talked about our 
incentive for start-ups. And every time I meet with students in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, they talk about entrepreneurship, 
that they want to be entrepreneurs in this province. 
 
In her speech in reply to the budget speech, she talked, Mr. 
Speaker, about it being a program that maybe some would 
want, that it’s overly complex, etc. Mr. Speaker, this is 
something that many, many young people in this province want. 
It’s the future of employment here. It’s the future of our 
province, and I’m really glad that we’re supporting it. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that answer completely 
ignored the reality that this budget did nothing to repair the 
damage caused by the budget last year, and she certainly didn’t 
answer the question to the social work students who are rightly 
concerned with the cuts and with their ability to finish their 
program. This budget did nothing to restore, or to repair the 
damage caused by last year. And certainly she can’t hide from 
the fact that this budget actually has $12 million less than the 
budget in 2016-2017, $12 million less than a full two years ago, 
Mr. Speaker. Just like the Education minister, she’s trying to 
convince us that not as bad as last year is somehow good 
enough. It’s not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the social work students deserve answers and 
commitments, not spin. When will the Sask Party fully fund our 
universities, repair the damage that they caused last year, and 
make higher education the priority that it needs to be? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We 
provided a 1.5 per cent increase in this budget. And I 
understand that it’s difficult for our universities, but we will be 
working with them. I met with the board of governors of all of 
our major institutions and will be doing that on a go-forward 
basis. 

I think it’s important to recognize that we also provided funding 
for the College of Medicine at a time when we have an opening 
of a children’s hospital and the North Battleford facility, Mr. 
Speaker, which is incredibly important to the future of this 
province. It keeps that university in the U15, and there are tons 
of students who are involved in that particular program and in 
that college, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would also add this, that our universities . . . the 
comprehensive university of the University of Regina is one of 
the fourth-highest dependent on government resources going 
forward. The University of Saskatchewan is also the 
fifth-highest dependent on provincial revenues. We’re going to 
work with our institutions to try to diversify their funding pool, 
Mr. Speaker, and I’m really looking forward to working with 
them closely over the next year. Thanks very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Job Advertisements and Employment Numbers 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, it’s no secret that, under the Sask 
Party, more and more Saskatchewan people are looking for 
work. But it’s not just their tax hikes and heartless cuts that are 
making it more difficult to find a job posting. The Sask Party is 
also shutting down the saskjobs.ca website. This is a valuable 
tool for people looking for work in our province, and the Sask 
Party is taking it away. Why is the Sask Party shutting down 
this website that helps so many people get back on the job site? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well the reality is that that site will 
continue to operate. It’s going to be connected with the National 
Job Bank website. This has been the result of a long-standing 
negotiation and agreement between the provinces and the 
Government of Canada to integrate provincial job sites with the 
National Job Bank, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you know, we finally get an economic question from the 
NDP, which is a good thing. What we don’t know, Mr. Speaker 
. . . We have a singular issue before the country right now that 
has engendered debate, engendered discussion right across the 
political spectrum, that has been the dominant issue that we 
have seen, and that is of course the Trans Mountain pipeline, 
Mr. Speaker. We have an opposition opposite, a fundamentally 
unserious . . . 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca would like to 
maybe somehow get a question? Maybe somebody can disperse 
one to him. I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — We have a fundamentally unserious 
opposition across the way, Mr. Speaker, who have had nothing 
to say on this issue. We don’t know what their position is. We 
haven’t heard a comment on this, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of 
the Opposition needs to stand up and say what his position is on 
this. Does he support this government’s efforts, this 
government’s efforts to have the Kinder Morgan pipeline go 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3803 

forward? Or does he stand with his friends in British Columbia 
and John Horgan to see it not go forward? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, no answer on jobs yet again. 
We’ve seen this government off-load its responsibilities over 
the years, off-loading onto school boards, off-loading onto 
municipalities. Now they’re off-loading responsibility for job 
postings onto the federal government — this on top of the fact 
that they’re cutting job training and workforce development 
programs by nearly $3 million in this year’s budget. And an 
Edmonton-based construction company is running radio ads in 
Saskatoon for jobs in Alberta. 
 
No wonder Friday’s jobs vacancy numbers showed 
Saskatchewan at the back of the pack along with PEI [Prince 
Edward Island] and Newfoundland. How can the Sask Party 
justify cutting programs that help people get back to work when 
there are so many in our province in need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think I gave a 
pretty clear explanation as to what’s happening with saskjobs.ca 
and our partnership with the National Job Bank.  
 
As far as jobs, Mr. Speaker, I’m not actually sure what reports 
they’re looking at. The last Statistics Canada labour market 
force survey that came out just I think about a week and a half 
ago showed in fact that Saskatchewan had added 4,200 jobs 
over the course of the last month and 1,500 jobs year over year, 
which is in addition to the over 60,000 jobs that have been 
created in this province over the course of the last decade, Mr. 
Speaker, which is in stark contrast to their record which was the 
absolute worst in Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, last question I gave an opportunity for the 
Leader of the Opposition to stand up and clarify his position 
with regard to Kinder Morgan. I suspect the Leader of the 
Opposition says that, you know what, he’s supportive of 
pipelines. He’s just never yet found one that he can get behind. 
Mr. Speaker, he has an opportunity right now. He can stand in 
his place. He can stand in his place and say what the position 
that he has and the position of his party is on Kinder Morgan 
rather than hiding under a pile of coats. What’s your position? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Wait Times for Surgery 
 
Mr. Meili: — The member would be happy to table the job 
numbers so that you can learn a bit from her. And I’m happy to 
inform you on my position. This is a pipeline that has been 
approved and should go forward. I’ve been very clear on that. 
 
We’ll also ask you to address another question that didn’t get 
answered last week. I asked the Premier, increasing wait times 
for surgeries. And he seemed to be a bit taken by surprise, 
which is surprising because we’ve seen these numbers continue 
to rise over the last few years. I’m sure the Premier will be 
happy to tell us old statistics or explain how this is somehow 

the fault of an NDP government from 15 years ago, but it’s the 
Sask Party that’s let this happen, and it’s happening now. 
 
To the people across the province who are desperately waiting 
to get the surgical care they need: has the Premier done his 
homework? Can he explain what’s changed, why those numbers 
have risen so much, and why, during the tenure of this Health 
minister, those wait lists have gotten so long? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, you know, something 
that’s gotten a lot larger in this province is our population. 
We’ve grown by over 160,000 people over the last 10 years, 
and some of those people that have come to move here are 
elderly and children that do access more health care, Mr. 
Speaker. So sometimes, in situations like that, there is more 
health care that’s needed. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this government has invested mightily in 
doctors and nurses, and surgery wait times, Mr. Speaker. In 
fact, as something that members opposite are opposed to, 
private surgery centres within our public system, Mr. Speaker, 
they’ve accomplished over 69 surgeries in those private centres. 
Where would we be if still under the NDP and under their plan 
of not partnering with private enterprise to shorten some of 
these wait times, Mr. Speaker? 
 
We know that right now, although there has been a slight 
increase in some of these wait times, 79 per cent of patients are 
receiving surgery on or at their offered surgery date within three 
months; 91 per cent are receiving surgery their offered date or 
on that date within six months, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have invested over 421 million in dedicated funding since 
2010, and we’ll continue to keep our . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It would be odd that a 
party that talks so much about the population growing up 
wouldn’t have estimated, when they were making the promise 
that no one, zero people would be waiting more than three 
months for surgery, that they wouldn’t have taken that into 
account as they made that plan. 
 
But the most recent data shows something more than a slight 
increase, Mr. Speaker. It shows close to 10,000 people waiting 
more than three months for surgery. That’s not zero, Mr. 
Speaker; it’s 10,000. There’s a lot of zeros, and it’s five times 
as many people as were waiting three years ago. 
 
Other provinces are finding solutions, improving the public 
health care system. Saskatchewan, at the same time, is falling 
behind. Talking about how good things were five years ago is 
cold comfort for those who are waiting now. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
try again. What’s changed? What’s changed, and what’s the 
plan to reverse this trend so that Saskatchewan people can get 
timely access to the surgeries that they need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 



3804 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In the 
surgical wait time initiative, the efforts that we have made in 
health care in general — but specific to the surgical wait time 
list that we inherited some 10 years ago — have paid off, Mr. 
Speaker, and have paid off in shorter wait times for all of those 
waiting for their surgeries here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our investment in health care in general and access to medical 
professionals in this province, as well as access to facilities, Mr. 
Speaker, has been strong, with 15 long-term care and health 
care facilities built in rural Saskatchewan. We see a new 
hospital in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. We see a new hospital 
coming up in the children’s hospital in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
We see a replacement of a 100-year-old hospital in the 
community of North Battleford, Mr. Speaker. We see the 
hospital in Humboldt that was announced seven times under the 
members opposite, built under this government, being invested 
in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see investment in physicians, 750 more physicians working 
in the province versus, under the NDP, 173 reduction in 
physicians, Mr. Speaker. We see investment in over 3,000 
nurses here in the province of Saskatchewan relative to 450 
fewer nurses under the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government continues to invest in health care and health 
care facilities rather than closing them in communities across 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I hope the students in the gallery enjoyed that. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader . . . 
sorry, the . . . 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 221 through 223. 
 
The Speaker: — Table 221 to 223. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great honour to 
stand in this House to speak on any topic, whether it is 
members’ statements, petitions, speaking to the budget. 
 

This April marks my two years sitting in this House, and I 
would like to take this opportunity to say thank you to all my 
constituents of Regina Pasqua who sent me to represent them in 
this legislature. Mr. Speaker, also I would like to say thank you 
to my wife, Attia, for supporting me for my day-to-day life and 
this job. Also our three boys: Ayaz is in grade 10, Kashif in 
grade 7, and Arsalan is in grade 3. These three boys are truly a 
blessing for our house. We had a great time during last Easter 
break, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take the opportunity to say thank 
you to our former premier, Brad Wall, for his great service and 
dedication to this province for 18 consecutive years. Also, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to say congratulations to our new Premier 
for holding this torch strong and high with great enthusiasm to 
serve the people of Saskatchewan. With this unprecedented 
team, we are very confident for Saskatchewan’s future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget was delivered on April 10th. And we 
received a number of feedback, very positive feedback from 
Saskatchewan people: businesses, stakeholders, and analysts. 
The CEO [chief executive officer] of the Saskatchewan 
Chamber of Commerce, Steve McLellan, posted on Facebook 
on April 10, 2018, and I quote, “Without a plan, getting a 
balanced budget would not be achievable. We are pleased that 
this 2018-2019 budget has a clear plan that is working towards 
that balanced budget.” 
 
We have a plan, Mr. Speaker, a plan for people of 
Saskatchewan, a plan for sustainable economy and growth. And 
the books need to be balanced, Mr. Speaker. Everyone 
understands that spending should not exceed revenue. If 
government does not control spending and relies on borrowing 
money from other sources, then they will have loan repayment 
in the next budget rather than an emphasis on saving and 
investment. Then the vicious circle of crowding-out effects 
leaves the government allocates with less money to invest in 
education, health, and the highway system, as this happened in 
the NDP government when they temporarily benefited by 
borrowing money and sending the bill to the next generation to 
pay the debts, which the Saskatchewan Party government had to 
pay $3 billion for that. Mr. Speaker, we chose not to find a 
temporary solution to cover up difficult financial situations in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on March 24, 2017, a professor at the University 
of Calgary, Blake Shaffer said and I quote, “. . . the 
Government of Saskatchewan presented a budget offering what 
one might call a middle ground. That is, they will solve their 
budget problem with both revenue and spending measures.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year we made a plan for balancing the budget 
within three years, and we are on the track to have it balanced 
next year in 2019-2020. Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that the 
prices of our commodities are low, Saskatchewan is the fastest 
growing province in Canada. The province’s population has 
now increased for 46 consecutive quarters, growing by more 
than 176,000 during that period, the fastest and the most 
sustained period of population growth in 85 years. 
 
Remember the challenging time in the NDP government: no 
plan other than raising taxes, no investments in nearly 16 years, 
and the highest unemployment rate in the country, which was 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3805 

the reason people started leaving this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we delivered a deficit budget in 2017, and of 
course a few difficult decisions were made. But, Mr. Speaker, 
here I would like to quote from Fraser Institute on March 22, 
2017: “Saskatchewan’s budget lays out a generally realistic 
quick path to balance and future generations in Saskatchewan 
will benefit from the reduced debt accumulation that will 
result.” 

 
But we still have the fastest growth in this province. The 
building permits issued in Saskatchewan in January 2018, 
raised by 31.2 per cent more compared to January 2017. During 
this period, Saskatchewan ranked fifth among the provinces in 
terms of growth, and the national average increased by 18.7 per 
cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on April 11th, 2018 in question period, the Leader 
of the Opposition quoted a very popular phrase, that the best 
time to plant a tree is 30 years ago. This is very correct, Mr. 
Speaker. That tree they planted while they were in the 
government, the tree of the debt, the loan tree, the borrowing 
money, which grew up very fast, and our generation scurried 
from that dark shadow of that tree and started moving out of 
this province. Later on, Saskatchewan Party government 
harvested a $3 billion debt from that NDP loan tree, Mr. 
Speaker. And that money could have been spent on our health 
and our education in Saskatchewan. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP is trying to plant one more tree in 
Saskatchewan. They are working hard on that carbon tax tree. 
The plant is going to take approximately $4 billion to grow it. 
And we can assure you that we will not let them plant this tree. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we released Prairie Resilience: A 
Made-in-Saskatchewan Climate Change Strategy in December 
2017. The strategy focuses on climate resilience, reducing our 
emissions and adapting to the effect of climate change without 
raising tax, reducing emissions in a way that is economically 
sustainable and promote growth, in our focus. By 2030 our 
strategy will result in a 40 per cent reduction in emissions from 
electrical generation, as well as 40 per cent to 45 per cent 
reduction from methane. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know when and where to plant a tree. We 
know how to spend the nation’s dollars, how to maintain 
farmers’ demands, power plants and roads, health and 
education, investment in existing businesses, marketing for new 
businesses and other infrastructure and, at the same time, 
reducing taxes. Saskatchewan people have already saved $5.9 
billion, and 112,000 people have been removed from the 
provincial tax roll, $4.3 billion in personal income tax cuts. And 
again, Mr. Speaker, $1.3 billion in education property tax cuts, 
saving residents approximately $100 million per year. 
 
Here is our record of infrastructure, Mr. Speaker: 12.5 billion in 
infrastructure since 2007 averaging $1 billion per year; 1.4 
billion in infrastructure for our health care system, more than 
double the previous 10-year period which allows the shortest 
surgical waiting time in Canada, Mr. Speaker, compared to the 
longest surgical time under the NDP government. 

Mr. Speaker, we understand the significance of health care. 
Saskatchewan was one of the two provinces that had no 
children’s hospitals. Now we do, in Saskatoon, and that is not 
the only one, Mr. Speaker. In Moose Jaw we have a hospital; 
Saskatchewan Hospital North Battleford. 
 
Let’s compare with their record, Mr. Speaker: 52 hospitals were 
closed. And one can tell that . . . where did that staff go from 
those hospitals. We understand the seniors’ need and built about 
15 new long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker, tripled the 
seniors’ income plan benefit from $90 to $270 which never 
have been increased during the NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had the best use of public dimes, hired 750 
doctors and 3,400 more nurses of all designations in 
Saskatchewan. $8.55 million annual for autism services, which 
is a 1,600 per cent increase since 2007. These are the realities 
that how we use public money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now in this budget 2018-2019, $2.8 million will fulfill the 
government commitment to provide individualized funding for 
children with autism spectrum disorder, initial funding of 4,000 
per child under the age of six, Mr. Speaker. And $2.7 billion 
invested in mental health and addictions since 2007; double the 
funding to the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, which is a 117 
per cent increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re very serious about providing services to the 
people of Saskatchewan they deserve. Mr. Speaker, our minister 
of trade and export development is absolutely right: this 
opposition is non-serious. Mr. Speaker, here is a very important 
topic of my debate on this budget, is education. Education is a 
precious asset we give to our generation which cannot be 
compromised at any cost. But the NDP government failed to 
provide quality of education by closing schools, which 
overcrowded the classrooms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have never been serious about education. In 
fact they closed about 176 schools, and we all know where did 
the staff go for those schools. 
 
We have been serious about education, Mr. Speaker: nearly 
$1.5 billion to build and repair schools; 40 new or replacement 
schools, including nine joint-use schools in Saskatchewan in 
Saskatchewan’s fastest-growing communities, and 25 major 
renovations; $49.6 million for preventative maintenance and 
renewal as well as emergent funding, a 15 per cent increase; 35 
per cent increase for school division and operating funding 
since 2007; 840 new teachers since 2007, which is a 9 per cent 
increase, Mr. Speaker; created over 8,500 new child care 
spaces, which is a 75 per cent increase. 
 
We are on track, Mr. Speaker. We have a plan. We set our goals 
and the targets, and we tell our people of Saskatchewan how to 
accomplish that. We do not just write something on an Excel 
sheet and call, this is a plan. And without knowing, the plan can 
cost the next generation billions of dollars, as in the NDP 
leadership, the Leader of the Opposition told that plan that costs 
about $2.5 million and has no cost on that . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Leader of the Opposition, yes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I support the motion put forward by the member 
from Canora-Pelly, and I oppose the amendment by the 



3806 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

opposition since that do not have any rationale in it. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice.  
  
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you for 
the opportunity to speak to the budget. It’s a great opportunity 
as well, Mr. Speaker, to be able to thank and recognize people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the opposition has been waiting for an 
update on the Saskatoon Southeast turkey raiser . . . turkey 
fundraiser. Turkey raiser, well, speaking of . . . Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to tell the members opposite a little bit about the 
turkey fundraiser. We sold and we delivered 97 turkeys. I want 
to thank everyone that participated. For those people that did 
not want a turkey, we gave them the option of having a 
donation equal to the value of the turkey made to a charity. 
 
This year Read Saskatoon will receive nearly $1,000. They’re a 
great charity and they’re a wonderful resource. They teach 
reading and literacy to new Canadians, adult learners, and 
families. They use volunteers to do a lot of work, and I want to 
thank them and give them a shout-out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I usually give an update on our moms. 
Sandy’s mom is 94. My mom will be 97 in about two weeks. 
Both of them are in facilities that provide them some assistance, 
but both of them are in remarkable health. And they tell me, 
both of them, that they plan to live long enough that we don’t 
receive any kind of inheritance from them. And actually we’re 
just fine with that. 
 
My mom is a keen watcher of question period, and sometimes 
when she watches it she doesn’t even put me on mute. She’s 
been carefully assessing both the . . . I know that some of my 
colleagues, Mr. Speaker, will put me on mute, some maybe not 
so much or always. But, Mr. Speaker, she’s also been watching 
the new leaders and their conduct in the House. And she told 
me the other day that after a lot of consideration, she was 
supporting the new Saskatchewan Party leader. And I thank her 
for that, and so does her MLA. 
 
I want to thank all the Saskatoon Southeast constituents, and for 
that matter all of Saskatoon and our province. They provide 
great feedback and input. They’ve been great volunteers and 
supporters. My constituency president, Eugene Paquin, has 
recently been named as a recipient of the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal. He’s been a tireless advocate for people with 
disabilities, so to him I offer my congratulations and my thanks. 
 
I want to thank my office staff in Saskatoon. My long-suffering 
constituency assistant, Gordon Rutten, has retired after 10 years 
of trying to make me look competent. He’s 73 years old. He 
was, Mr. Speaker, the mayor of Martensville, and he is the 
mayor that took Martensville from being a town to being a city. 
 
I remember when he came in and told me that he was going to 
run for mayor. After he became mayor, I congratulated him and 
I asked him, will I be obliged to call you Your Worship? He 
thought about it for a moment and he said, absolutely. I then 
asked him if he was going to start calling me Minister. He 
quickly replied that he had no time for that nonsense. We had a 
good laugh. 

He’s a retired educator, and he comes from a large family of 
teachers, all of which have very strong views on the importance 
of the teaching profession, and they’ve all been very generous 
at sharing those opinions. I value those opinions and frankly, 
Mr. Speaker, they’re correct. 
 
My very new CA [constituency assistant] is Angela Knoss 
who’s been working out extremely well. She’s very bright, very 
caring, very compassionate with the constituents. Her husband, 
Brad, has the unique and strange hobby of racing Volkswagen 
dune buggies at the Bonneville Salt Flats. He’s gone over 130 
miles per hour in an open dune buggy. Angela, I want to thank 
you for what you’re doing. 
 
My staff here has had some changes. My former chief of staff, 
Drew Dwernychuk, who had worked with me for six years, has 
gone to work in Executive Council. He has been a friend and 
ally and a co-conspirator of pranking some of the people in my 
office. Also notably Brayden Fox who’s one of the victims of 
our pranks; Brayden left to become chief of staff elsewhere. 
 
Matthew Glover’s gone to the Ministry of Education to do 
comms. I miss Lacy, Donna, Sherry, and Aidan who are also in 
the Education minister’s office. The new Education minister 
will be well served by Lacy and Aidan who still remain there. I 
thank all of them. 
 
My new chief of staff has certificates that show he was born 
and christened with the name Clinton Fox, but I’ve always 
referred to him as Flinton Cox and plan to continue to do that. I 
have a new ministerial assistant, Darryl Filazek, and I haven’t 
figured out anything creative to do with his name, but he looks 
after SaskTel issues and does really well. I also have an MA 
[ministerial assistant] from Saskatoon, Molly Waldman who 
came to me very early on after she started with me and asked 
me to call her Wallace. I have agreed and will continue to do 
that. Our senior admin is Cindy Chamberlin and is awesome. 
Dominique Sauve was our junior admin until today when she 
was also vacuumed up to work in Executive Council. 
 
I’ve had, Mr. Speaker, some of the finest staffs anywhere. 
They’ve been bright, competent, hard-working, relentlessly 
funny. They’ve put up with my pranks and my occasional bad 
joke. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I trained them, you know. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — The Minister of Education says that he 
trained those people and, to the extent of their abilities, I’ll 
certainly give him credit for that much. 
 
These people are not just co-workers. They’re friends. They’re 
always up for a trip to Five Guys or Smokin’ Okies. 
 
But most of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank Sandy. Sandy’s 
been with me for nearly 23 years. She’s the one that’s on the 
billboards and Christmas cards that make those things look 
good. When we were doing the 2016 election, they were 
preparing a draft of a new brochure. I told the people that were 
doing the draft, make sure you’ve got lots of pictures of Sandy 
and Brad Wall. The first mock-up had three pictures of Sandy, 
five of Brad Wall, and none of me. Probably a good decision. 
 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3807 

I want to thank all of the families of all of the MLAs. They 
make it possible for us to do what we do. They prop us up when 
we’re down. They go to events. They remind us to take our 
papers and our clothes when we leave. They were sounding 
boards for our thoughts and ideas. It’s great to have family like 
we do. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour today to stand here and respond to 
the 2018-2019 budget that was delivered last Tuesday by our 
Finance minister and my good friend, the member from 
Humboldt. Mr. Speaker, the member from Humboldt is the 
second woman in Saskatchewan history to deliver a budget. Her 
strength, determination, and dedication to her portfolio and our 
province is an inspiration to all of us, and she is truly the right 
person for the job.  
 
I’m proud to stand with the Finance minister, the Premier, and 
the rest of caucus in support of this budget. The budget was an 
important one for our province. This budget showed that our 
government has heard the concerns of Saskatchewan citizens 
and, Mr. Speaker, it shows that we listened and will continue to 
listen. We are on track, Mr. Speaker. We are on track to meet 
the goals of balancing the budget in three years. 
 
With regards to our justice budget, I would like to take this time 
to speak to a few of the things that we’re doing. In the justice 
budget this year, you will see $4 million to court services, 98.9 
new FTEs [full-time equivalent]. Mr. Speaker, since we’ve been 
in government, our province has grown. It’s grown more than I 
think anyone could have imagined, especially the members 
opposite. With that growth though, we’ve understood that there 
are increased pressures on the justice system. That’s why, in 
this budget, you will see that $4 million will go to court services 
to ensure that we can effectively support our courts. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that domestic violence is an issue faced 
by too many in our province. In this budget we have 
reconfirmed our commitment to funding the transition houses 
and shelters that are desperately needed by women and children 
fleeing unhealthy relationships and environments. I am 
reminded of the late member from Melfort and his unwavering 
support for the transition house in Melfort. As an MLA, Kevin 
Phillips has been one of the best people that we’ve had in our 
province, and there’s nothing better than to be part of a building 
that would help those that are in need. So the legacy that Kevin 
Phillips has left for that transition house is something that we 
say thank you for. 
 
Last session we introduced legislation to empower survivors of 
domestic and sexual assault to terminate residential leases early. 
Additionally, after consultations with numerous stakeholders, 
we introduced legislation for employers to allow for up to 10 
unpaid days off for survivors to seek help or to help family 
members who are suffering. 
 
Currently the Ministry of Justice is looking into Clare’s law, 
which was introduced by a father in the United Kingdom who 
lost his daughter in 2009 to domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, 
this father believes his daughter’s senseless death could have 
been prevented if she had known about her partner’s violent 
past. Our government wants to do what we can to prevent 

violence and, Mr. Speaker, we think that Clare’s law would 
help. Clare’s law is an interpersonal violence disclosure 
process. It will allow the police to disclose information about 
previous violent or abusive behaviour. In Saskatchewan this can 
be developed under existing laws and police powers to prevent 
crime. Police can also use the opportunity to proactively engage 
the individual in safety planning. 
 
The existing system in the United Kingdom has two different 
streams: the right to ask, where an individual can apply to the 
police for information about previous violent or abusive 
behaviour; and the right to know. If the police receive 
information about violent or abusive behaviour by an 
individual, they may proactively disclose the individual to that 
individual’s intimate partner. If a matter is classified as no 
concern, then no disclosure is made. If a matter is classified as a 
concern, the police will conduct a further evaluation to 
determine if disclosure should be made. Mr. Speaker, I hope 
that our commitment to health and domestic violence is clear. 
 
The federal government imposed an aggressive timeline on us 
to prepare for the legalization of cannabis, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
proud to say that our province did its due diligence. We 
consulted the people of Saskatchewan by providing a survey to 
allow them to share their ideas and concerns. Over 34,000 
people utilized this survey and informed our development of the 
cannabis framework. Public safety has remained our top priority 
through the entire legalization process, and we’re confident that 
the framework we announced will keep this province safe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the privilege of being the Minister of 
Labour for a long time. I was actually reminded of this — just 
how long I’ve had this portfolio — when I was informed that 
I’m currently the longest serving Labour minister in Canada. 
My counterpart in the labour movement, Larry Hubich, is the 
longest serving president of a provincial federation of labour. 
Maybe it says something about both of us having been here too 
long. I don’t think so. 
 
I want to thank the workers in this province for everything that 
they do. The growth we’ve seen in Saskatchewan is a true 
representation of the hard work that they do each and every day. 
The safety of workers in Saskatchewan is a priority for this 
government. Since 2007 the time-loss injury rate in our 
province has dropped by over 50 per cent. This drop in injuries 
is largely due to the WorkSafe Saskatchewan Mission: Zero 
initiative launched in 2008 in partnership with the Workers’ 
Compensation Board and the Ministry of Labour Relations and 
Workplace Safety. 
 
The goal of Mission: Zero is to achieve zero injuries, zero 
fatalities, and zero suffering. In 2017, 88 per cent of workplaces 
reported injury free. Mr. Speaker, while this is a great number, 
it also demonstrates the hard work of employers and employees, 
and that this is paying off. However, we still have work to do, 
and we will not stop until we achieve our goal of Mission: Zero. 
Now is not the time to be complacent. 
 
In support of our targeted intervention strategy, we created five 
new OHS [occupational health and safety] officer positions in 
this budget. Now that we have reached 88 per cent of the 
workplaces, we are refocusing our target to get to the smaller 
employers that are more geographically dispersed across the 



3808 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to inform you that, after a lot of hard 
work and attention, the Ministry of Labour have completed 
updates to mining regulations that will come into effect April 
9th, 2019. 
 
The regulations include the introduction of an asset 
management plan which requires employers and owners to 
develop a plan for the inspection and maintenance of all fixed 
assets not already covered by a prescribed inspection program, a 
safety equivalency process that allows employers to apply for a 
variance from the existing regulations if a process or technology 
equals or exceeds the level of health and safety set in the 
regulations, new explosive provisions which harmonize with 
the federal Act and regulations, a requirement for each hoist to 
have a preventive hoist maintenance program, a fire risk 
mitigation strategy approved by a professional engineer and the 
occupational health committee, and a maximum airborne 
contaminant level and testing standards for diesel particulate 
matter. We believe that with the changes made to the 
regulations, and the introduction of these new ones, the safety 
in our province will continue to improve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to take this time to talk about the 
Global Transportation Hub. I know this House often hears 
about the GTH, but the members opposite rarely recognize the 
great work and investment that has been taking place out there. 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder if this will be the year, maybe even 
during the budget debate, that some of the members opposite 
will finally speak up. Maybe they will talk about the fact that 
there is 60,000 containers being moved by CP Rail [Canadian 
Pacific Railway] annually. They might even highlight that there 
are 4,600 trucks coming and going, in and out of the hub every 
week. 
 
They could also talk about the 24-7 operations of Loblaw, 
which is the place of work for 750 employees. Mr. Speaker, 
while on a tour of Loblaw a few weeks ago, I not only had the 
opportunity to see how hard the employees work every day, but 
also how proud they are to work there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as soon as you walk in, you’re greeted from flags 
from the countries all over the world. Mr. Speaker, there are 
employees from 47 different cultures, and each time someone 
from a new country is hired, they hang a flag for them. It was 
wonderful, Mr. Speaker, and I’m reminded of Saskatchewan’s 
motto, “from many peoples, strength.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the GTH is something for our province to take 
pride in. Maybe this year we’ll see members opposite recognize 
the progress and hard work of a Saskatchewan-based business 
and its operations and its employees. Maybe they’ll see that it’s 
a multi-generational project. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, let me say it is an honour to stand today 
and to support this budget. I will be voting in favour of this 
budget and against the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and 

congratulations to you in your new role. I know you have high 
aspirations for all that you hope to bring to it, and I’m sure that 
you will. 
 
Of course it’s been a sad 10 days and it’s at times such as these, 
as we continue to collectively grieve over the tragedy in 
Humboldt, that friendships and connections, and of course 
family, matter more than ever. Every connection holds perhaps 
deeper significance. 
 
Many of my colleagues on both sides last week spoke 
eloquently about the tragedy, in some cases through the prism 
of personal experience or interpretation of what it’s like to get 
that call about a child who has been injured or worse, about 
being a team, and how the Broncos will always be our guys; 
about a new, renewed, and deeper sense of what the phrase 
“thoughts and prayers” can really signify; and about the 
importance and meaning of expressing thoughts and prayers in 
all sorts of circumstances to those who matter to us. 
 
And I was struck as I listened to colleagues about how in just 
two short years, in most cases just since the election, these 
colleagues have become friends, and how indeed certain 
moments — certain comments, be it of support or of asking 
after family members, just moments of simple generosity or 
graciousness or camaraderie, of fun, day to day as we pass 
through this place together — I was struck by how these 
moments have mattered a great deal to me and how I will 
always hold them dear. 
 
These are good people here in this Chamber and in this 
building. And there are now friends I didn’t have just over two 
years ago before this adventure began. Among them, dear Ang 
Currie, the mighty, my former chief; my trusted current chief, 
Jeremy Brick; the lovely Sandy LaClaire in my office. 
 
And in this and in other offices and in other capacities, Mr. 
Speaker, Drew D, as I called him, Dustin Clark, Dane Seidle, 
Max Waldman, Aidan Katz, Michelle Chyz, Donna Rybchuk, 
James, Patrick, Tim, Stuart, the former premier, the current 
Premier. 
 
Outside this building too, Mr. Speaker, how can I have known 
Carrie Zdunich, my CA, for just over two years? Surely we 
have known each other a lifetime. Thank you to all of them. 
 
And most of all, to my darling family, you are quite simply 
everything to me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every day, every night that I leave this place — 
and as my family isn’t here in Regina, I often work pretty late 
— I roll my little document roller bag through the Souris 
gallery. We all know it. It features members of this Legislative 
Assembly, men and women, mainly men in the early years. In 
that gallery and around the corner is a photo of every member 
who has ever worked here, who has passed through. And as you 
pass the photographs, you note certain faces and you wonder, 
what was their story? What was their passionate issue? What 
did they hope to achieve here and did they achieve it? Or did 
they just get the proverbial ball rolling, which of course can be 
important too. 
 
And I think of that old movie Dead Poets Society, and the 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3809 

Robin Williams character telling his students to look at class 
photos from the ’20s and the ’30s and to look at all the 
expressions of earnestness and expectation and hope on their 
forebears’ faces, and how important it is as students living now 
in this time to seize the day and to imagine they hear those 
forebears whisper carpe diem, to seize their moment. 
 
Politically of course, Mr. Speaker, that can be challenging at 
times. For one thing, it all depends on one’s point of view and 
about what seizing the moment means to you. I remember the 
member for Regina Lakeview once saying, and I paraphrase, 
that we live in a time of great flux, great change, where 
everything is changing. And depending on one’s point of view 
and where one falls politically on certain issues, I suppose we 
all feel that at times, that the other side on this or that issue 
actually threatens our ability to seize the moment and to achieve 
what we consider to be the broader good. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just take here in Canada the polarization that we 
are seeing over pipelines and the carbon tax. The Leader of the 
Opposition has said that he considers the right wing/left wing 
dichotomy to be a bit overplayed and oversimplified. Okay. He 
has also said, and I do paraphrase a bit here, that spending 
money left, right, and centre, let’s say to the tune of $2.5 billion 
in terms of promises, is actually an investment and that it pays 
off down the road. And I would submit that’s where the old 
clichéd split between, let’s call it left and right, comes in. 
 
Of course we believe in investments in health, education, 
highways. We’ve made record investments in these areas, and 
investments across the board have continued in this budget. But 
we have made them in the spirit of fiscal stewardship and 
responsibility. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And with all respect to the new tone that the Leader of the 
Opposition strives for, honourably strives for, I would ask, 
where has that model ever worked? Did spending as if there’s 
no tomorrow and calling it investment work in Premier Rae’s 
Ontario? Is it working in Premier Wynne’s Ontario, where 
interest on the provincial debt is now the fourth-largest 
spending item in the budget, which is equivalent to sending 
1 million children to school, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Is it working in Premier Horgan’s BC [British Columbia], 
which has now decided — surprise, surprise — to divert part of 
its provincial carbon tax to fund tax credits to so-called 
preferred groups, and where gas prices are exploding? So much 
for revenue neutral. Where has it worked and not left a huge 
mess behind it for someone else to clean up? 
 
As for right and left, whatever you want to call it, we would 
say, Mr. Speaker, that seizing the moment is about fostering a 
competitive economic atmosphere, getting our goods to market. 
Seizing the moment is about backing pipelines with everything 
we’ve got, and it’s about mounting the most spirited defence we 
can against a federally imposed carbon tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1885 Sir John A. Macdonald wrote of the great 
trans-Canadian railway, “. . . events have shown us that we are 
made one people by that road, that that iron link has bound us 
together in such a way that we stand superior to most of the 

shafts of ill fortune.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, from our perspective it amounts to nothing short 
of madness that we live in a time in which achieving that same 
sense of unity as a country again is within reach, that this time a 
pipeline link, pipeline links, could bind us together as a nation 
and bring about greater prosperity for all so we could withstand 
the shifts of ill fortune . . . madness that we are indeed in such 
flux that we face an existential threat to our nation’s identity 
within our own nation. And frankly we find the Leader of the 
Opposition’s position on this vexing. 
 
Let’s talk for a moment about the importance of the oil and gas 
industry. Actually I hardly know where to begin, Mr. Speaker. 
We have Jeremy Corbyn; Bernie Sanders the younger over 
there; and we have leave-it-to-the-feds, leave-it-in-the-ground 
leaper. So it makes for an interesting combination. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition told Pipeline News that we need 
to look at whether pipelines improve the economy and result in 
new jobs. He called Keystone XL “economically unwise” and 
has called pipelines generally a way of transporting liquids. 
Liquid gold more like, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last year, the upstream oil and gas industry accounted for 
almost 34,000 direct and indirect jobs in this province. Oil and 
gas revenues, including royalties and land sales, added 
$600 million to the General Revenue Fund. Saskatchewan’s oil 
and gas sector is among the largest primary industry contributor 
to our GDP [gross domestic product], making up 15 per cent of 
the provincial total of $4.8 billion investment last year in 
Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
Also last year, Saskatchewan was ranked no. 2 in Canada by the 
Fraser Institute, no. 7 in the world for the best investment for 
climate for oil and gas, Mr. Speaker. Is that economic enough? 
Is that economic enough for the Leader of the Opposition? We 
are proud of the oil and gas sector and we’re not afraid to say 
so. This Premier, our new Premier is not afraid to say so, that 
we will continue to do everything we can to address and rectify 
pipeline delays and the lack of connections to tidewater which 
cost Saskatchewan some twenty, $200 million in royalties last 
year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
More broadly too, we have to remember the effect that our 
energy and resource sector has on the people of Saskatchewan 
and on improving their livelihoods. Take mining which 
provides some 30,000 direct and indirect jobs, including some 
2,000 direct jobs in northern Saskatchewan. Moreover, the 
mining sector in northern Saskatchewan is one of the largest 
employers of First Nations people in Canada. And as recently as 
2016, the northern mining industry purchased 43 per cent of its 
total goods and services worth $316 million either from 
northern suppliers or joint ventures with northern ownership. 
 
Take potash. It accounts for approximately 30 per cent of world 
production, directly employs some 5,000 people here in the 
province, and contributes to the livelihoods of thousands more. 
 
And take forestry. Last year this industry generated nearly $1.2 
billion in sales, an increase of 21 per cent from last year and the 
highest level of forestry sales in over a decade. It is another 
sector that would be gravely impacted by a carbon tax. 



3810 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

So by all means let us try to embrace that new tone to debate 
and to analyze things and to do what we can to work together. 
But a great start, in fact the best way to seize the day and seize 
our destiny as a province, and as the former premier said, to try 
to leave this place better than when we found it, is to stand 
united as a province and as a nation behind the things, behind 
the projects that build this nation. We owe that to all the fine 
people who’ve come before us whose pictures hang in the 
Souris gallery, and to those who are yet to come. 
 
Which is why, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion put 
forward, and not supporting the amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to weigh 
in on the budget, provide some of my thoughts. I will stick 
pretty closely to that topic, which I know some other members 
have not done so much today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I do want to provide some of my thoughts on this year’s 
Sask Party budget. But first I want to take the opportunity to 
thank my constituency assistant, Twyla Harris. She works very 
hard to keep things going in our office in Saskatoon and she 
approaches people with kindness and empathy and patience, 
which I know you know, Mr. Speaker. And if anyone has 
closely observed the work of constituency assistants, patience is 
quite the virtue for those folks, who often deal with a lot of the 
brunt of hardships that come to our offices, Mr. Speaker. So I 
want to thank Twyla for her work and her dedication. 
 
I also want to thank my partner, Grayson Beaudin who is an 
extraordinary teacher, a student in graduate studies, and he still 
manages to keep the home fires burning as well, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re buying a house right now and that can be quite a large 
project, all things considered, when you add up all the tasks. 
And he has been so helpful in leading that purchase and all of 
the things associated with it. And you know, it’s not the best 
time to be buying a house, in the middle of session as an MLA, 
Mr. Speaker, which I’m sure you can appreciate. So I want to 
thank Grayson. He’s been by my side for so many important 
moments, supporting me, challenging me at times, and helping 
me grow. And I hope that I provide the same support to him as 
well. 
 
And while I’m on my feet I would like to offer my sincere 
condolences to all of those affected by the Humboldt Broncos 
tragedy, Mr. Speaker. It’s true that this tragedy hits home for 
many of us. I know that I’ve spent countless hours of my life 
travelling to and from cadet activities, both as a teenager and 
once I was an officer. I’ve been on that bus. I think we’ve all 
been on that bus or been close to people who’ve been on those 
buses. 
 
And the tragedy also hits home for me and makes me think of 
my dad who used to play hockey out in rural southwest Alberta. 
And it really gives you pause. It makes you think about your 
loved ones. And I remember reading a post on Facebook right 
after the tragedy — that’s so much a source of our consumption 
of information nowadays, Mr. Speaker — and the post said 
something to the effect of, hug your loved ones tonight. And I 
was definitely feeling that as we grieved collectively as a group, 

not just that day but since then as well. And I think that’s how 
many of us have felt. 
 
But as many have said, it is still our duty to go ahead with the 
task at hand, and the task at hand is reviewing this year’s 
provincial budget. And I have to say that a lot of people of this 
province are still dealing with a lot of feelings and the effects of 
last year’s provincial budget, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party’s 
PST hike has hurt several economic-driving and job-creating 
industries in our province, including the construction industry 
and the restaurant industry, and people aren’t able to find and 
keep steady employment. 
 
And since so many of the members opposite have quoted news 
articles in their budget replies, I’ll follow in that tradition as 
well by sharing some of the articles after the 2017-2018 budget. 
And I just pulled a few that I could find in about five minutes, 
Mr. Speaker. This one is a CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation] article from March 7th, 2017, and it says, “Sask 
Premier wants to cut overall public-sector worker compensation 
by 3.5 per cent.” Another article from March 26th, 2017: 
“Saskatoon city council pursuing legal measures, other revenue, 
following loss of provincial grants.” And from March 21st, 
2017: “Sask budget hikes sales tax to 6 per cent, kills provincial 
bus company.” 
 
And I know a lot of people are still feeling the effects from 
many of these budget choices, Mr. Speaker. And I do say 
choices because these are decisions that were made in last 
year’s budget when the Premier was around the cabinet table, 
when those ministers were around the cabinet table, and they 
still bear responsibility for last year’s budget as well. 
 
And in my city, Saskatoon, Saskatoon’s job market is looking 
sluggish heading into the next quarter. When I’m talking about 
job numbers in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I focus on 
Saskatchewan, but I also have concerns for my hometown, 
which is Saskatoon. According to a report from 
ManpowerGroup, the employment outlook in Saskatoon is 
expected to drop by 2 per cent over the next few months. That 
is a 16 per cent decline since this time last year. 
 
I care a lot about people getting back to work in my city, Mr. 
Speaker, in my constituency, and the economic health of this 
province depends on the ability of folks to find good jobs. And 
as much as I appreciate the minister’s sunny outlook on some of 
the economic future of this province, that provides little comfort 
to folks who are struggling to find work now, today. 
 
And we hear the members opposite speak about the past quite 
often, Mr. Speaker, and they are more than welcome to look 
into the past all they like. On this side of the House, we are very 
focused on acknowledging the present and looking toward the 
future because that is what members of this Legislative 
Assembly have a responsibility to do. And I will tell you a little 
bit about the present. And some of the members opposite don’t 
like to hear news that doesn’t make them feel good. And I’m 
sorry to have to share with them some basic facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have the slowest employment growth in the country, 
outside of Newfoundland and Labrador. That is a fact. While 
we saw only 900 additional jobs in Saskatchewan last month, 
most of them part-time jobs, that was nowhere near the 32,000 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3811 

additional jobs in British Columbia or the 46,600 additional 
jobs in Alberta. That is a fact. We have the lowest minimum 
wage in the country. That is a fact. 
 
More people are leaving . . . I told you, Mr. Speaker, that some 
of these facts make the members opposite uncomfortable, and it 
seems that that’s happening. 
 
More people are leaving Saskatchewan to look for jobs in other 
provinces. Stats Canada’s interprovincial migration numbers 
demonstrate this. The number is over 50 per cent higher than in 
2008 when the Sask Party took over. That is a fact that the 
minister seems oblivious to. They don’t seem to want to talk 
about interprovincial migration right now, Mr. Speaker, only 
overall population numbers. And we are so pleased that the 
population is growing due to international immigration, Mr. 
Speaker. But newcomers need to be able to find work once 
they’re here. 
 
[15:15] 
 
What we are seeing is that people who already live in 
Saskatchewan, more of them are leaving to find opportunities 
elsewhere. And since 2008, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has 
tripled the debt. These are facts, Mr. Speaker. And the members 
opposite don’t like to hear these facts because it upsets them. 
But don’t worry; I will get to some positive ways forward, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Budgets are a time to look at our priorities. And when the 
employment growth is the slowest in Canada outside of 
Newfoundland, we should be making strategic investments in 
getting people back to work. We were hopeful, and I was 
hopeful, Mr. Speaker, that this budget would provide some of 
those investments, that we would see investments in job 
training and job creation programs. 
 
But instead of seeing these types of investments, Mr. Speaker, 
we saw cuts, cuts to the tune of $2.9 million in labour market 
programs. This Sask Party government is cutting programs that 
are designed to get people back to work in this province. And if 
there are citizens watching from home, they can have a look for 
themselves. Provincial estimates are available online and you 
can go look on page 89 of the Estimates book and see the cuts 
to the labour market programs that I am referring to, cuts to 
skills training, workforce development, and the provincial 
training allowance. 
 
And I’ll just briefly note what those cuts are. So in skills 
training allocation . . . Again I’m on page 89 of the Estimates 
book. In skills training allocation estimated for 2017-2018, we 
had $18.525 million — and excuse me, I’m having to translate 
as I go because it’s listed in thousands of dollars, so that’s also 
important to note for the people who are at home — down to 
17.847 million. Workforce development, 20.438 million down 
to 19.194 million. And the provincial training allowance from 
28.917 million to 27.917 million. 
 
So when you add these up, Mr. Speaker, using basic math, it’s 
about $2.9 million that we’re seeing in cuts to labour market 
programs. So you can imagine my overall shock at the fact that 
not only are we not investing in job training programs, but 
we’re actually seeing cuts from the Sask Party government. 

And the provincial training allowance, if folks aren’t familiar, 
provides income assistance to low-income adult students 
enrolled in full-time adult basic education, workforce 
development, or skills training programs. Isn’t this something 
that we would want to support, Mr. Speaker? And aren’t these 
areas we should be investing in for the future of our province? 
 
Instead we’re making higher debt payments this year, and the 
Sask Party has put us in a position where we have the highest 
net debt per capita that this province has ever seen — per 
capita, meaning we are accounting for the population growth, 
Mr. Speaker. And this is how they spend our money, our 
taxpayers’ money, after 10 years of record revenue, Mr. 
Speaker. It is upsetting. 
 
This budget shows no new investments in job creation and a 
government that is either not acknowledging the problem or is 
oblivious to it. And I will suggest that both of those scenarios 
are problematic, Mr. Speaker. We have Alberta construction 
companies advertising their work in their province on 
Saskatoon radio stations. Canada’s employment growth is 
picking up and our neighbouring provinces are creating jobs but 
Saskatchewan is being left behind. 
 
The bulk of my concentration has been spent on implications 
for jobs, Mr. Speaker. We know that since budgets are an 
opportunity to demonstrate the priorities of the government, 
they have implications across the board and they’re widespread. 
And I’ll speak briefly to some of these implications. 
 
First we have serious concerns about the elimination of the 
rental housing supplement. This supplement helps to put a roof 
over the head of some of our most vulnerable in Saskatchewan. 
This is a short-sighted cut to funding, and we need to take a 
new approach that protects our most vulnerable from ending up 
on the streets. 
 
And there was some mention, Mr. Speaker, about the national 
housing strategy and how this would integrate. And I’ve read 
the national housing strategy, Mr. Speaker. I’ve read it. I don’t 
see a firm plan for how it’s going to be executed in 
Saskatchewan and I certainly don’t see that being implemented 
in summer of 2018, Mr. Speaker. So what that means is that 
there is a gap in place from the cut-off of this rental housing 
supplement until at some point in the future when the national 
housing strategy comes into play. 
 
And I have another question about this, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
the fact that the national housing strategy actually accounts for 
. . . There’s federal money coming into it, but there’s also an 
expectation that there are provincial dollars that go into it as 
well. So my question as well is, where are those provincial 
dollars? If we’re counting on the national housing strategy 
being implemented, those provincial dollars need to be included 
in that. 
 
And if the argument from this government is that those 
provincial dollars are actually being cut, that we’re actually 
going to see a cut with the implementation of the national 
housing strategy, I have trouble understanding how that’s going 
to make our housing situation better in this province and how 
that’s going to help protect other individuals. 
 



3812 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

So I look forward to asking a number of these questions in 
committee about what the plan is for implementation and how 
we’re going to keep protecting some of the most vulnerable in 
this province. And I’m certainly not alone in this. I hear some 
comments from the other side as I’ve been talking about this. 
I’m certainly not alone in expressing my concern over this, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We have seen housing organization . . . people who are directly 
involved in working with folks who receive the rental housing 
supplement. We’ve worked with some folks directly in our 
constituency office who have benefited from this, and really 
there is a fear out there that this cut will lead to some of our 
most vulnerable out on the streets. 
 
And of course we’ve taken the time to talk about the cuts to 
education as well, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard some comments 
about this already coming up in question period, but we know 
that in fact education organizations are not lining up to say 
thank you for the budget and what it looks like this year, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards Association] talked 
about how it only goes so far in meeting pressures, you know, 
the fact that this is still very much a cut that they’re seeing. The 
STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] talked about how 
this funding won’t make it any easier to meet the needs of their 
students. So we’ve also heard organizations expressing concern 
over continued cuts to education, reflected in the fact that the 54 
million that was cut in last year’s budget has not been reinstated 
in full, Mr. Speaker, and the impact this is going to have on our 
kids’ classrooms. 
 
And of course I also want to take the time, Mr. Speaker, to talk 
about some of the positive things coming out of this budget and 
to give credit where credit is due. Some of the initiatives that 
we’ve seen from the Sask Party government have been helpful 
to individuals in this province, and I will give credit for those 
initiatives. I will also highlight the fact that there have been 
many different members of communities calling for some of 
these changes. Some of the members here have been calling for 
some of these changes as well, but we want to give appreciation 
to the government for putting forward some of these. 
 
So this includes screening babies for hearing loss, Mr. Speaker. 
One hundred per cent coverage for HIV [human 
immunodeficiency virus] drugs, something we’ve joined with 
community groups in calling for. But with that, Mr. Speaker, I 
also want to mention that we need to work on prevention of the 
spread of HIV in this province. So I’m very pleased to see that 
people will be getting the drugs that they need, but this needs to 
factor into an overall prevention plan. 
 
And the individualized funding for children under six with 
autism, this was promised back in 2016, so I’m glad to see the 
allocation now. I know many parents who have children with 
autism have said to me that they had sort of given up that the 
government was going to provide this funding because it was an 
election promise so two years ago, Mr. Speaker. It’s good to see 
them coming forward with the funding now. I’ve also heard 
some concerns about the fact that autism doesn’t end when kids 
are over six years old, so also concerns about the level of 
support that’s provided there. But these are good pieces, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m not afraid to give credit where credit is due. 
 
I also said I would talk about providing hope and the 
opportunities presented by the future, Mr. Speaker, so I’ll use 
some of my remaining time to do that. We need a fresh 
approach in this province that makes smart investments to grow 
our economy, to create jobs, and to protect the most vulnerable. 
 
The Sask Party government’s idea of diversifying our economy 
is to expand our tax base by increasing PST by a billion dollars. 
That’s taking money out of the pockets of hard-working people 
of the province; it’s not diversifying. 
 
One of the most important ways to grow our economy is to 
ensure we have a healthy and educated population. We need to 
create an environment where businesses can succeed. For that 
they need access to well-trained workers, and that the people of 
this province can afford to be customers of Saskatchewan 
businesses so that they’re putting money back into the 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
High rates of poverty or unequal access to education impede 
employment growth where smart, upfront investments have 
been shown to have a positive effect on economic growth. 
There’s so much possibility for growth here and so much 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker. These opportunities have not been 
embraced. And as we work to assemble our platform, we will 
be consulting with economic experts to determine which areas 
of investment would have the greatest impact on the economy 
and the well-being of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Overall, Mr. Speaker, I think there is hope for the province of 
Saskatchewan and I thank the Leader of the Opposition and my 
colleagues on this side of the House for providing their 
constructive thoughts on what we should be prioritizing around 
budget time. Budgeting is about prioritizing spending. And I 
will submit, Mr. Speaker, that prioritizing job training, skills 
training, workforce development, and education, these should 
not be viewed as expenses or areas to be cut. These are 
investments into the future of this province, Mr. Speaker, and to 
cut these areas demonstrates to the people of this province that 
the Sask Party government is shortchanging their future, our 
future, the world that my niece and nephews are going to be 
working in. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to support the amendment 
put forward by my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana, and to be 
part of this budget debate. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour to 
rise in my place and participate in this budget debate. I echo the 
sentiments of my colleagues and congratulate you in your new 
role in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is difficult to focus on the matters at hand when 
we are in the midst of such profound grief and sorrow in our 
province. I would like to share the eloquent words of an 
acquaintance of mine, Cam Fuller, who writes for the Saskatoon 
StarPhoenix: 
 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3813 

There are events in life that don’t make sense, that won’t 
ever make sense, that are outrageously unfair and 
unbearably cruel. There are times when fate turns, looks 
impassively at the vulnerable people it has forced to their 
knees, and shrugs. 
 
It’s too big to fight. There’s no winning. You can’t put 
your hand up and stop the wind blowing across a field on a 
frozen April day when spring and life and lives are 
postponed, perhaps indefinitely. 
 
And yet, what we’ve seen in the past few days isn’t 
resignation. It’s been a collective, intuitive, immediate and 
heartfelt effort to make a difference regardless of the odds 
— countless gestures that speak to the basic decency of 
people . . .  
 
There’s no way to change what happened and nobody 
thinks there is. But maybe our answer to the unfairness is 
to change ourselves. How much do we take each other for 
granted on those days when we allow ourselves to be 
seduced into thinking it’ll last forever? 

 
Thank you, people of Saskatchewan, for your countless gestures 
that speak to your basic decency, your caring, your kindness, 
your sense of community. I again extend my deepest 
sympathies to the families and friends affected by the Humboldt 
Broncos bus tragedy. 
 
With Mr. Fuller’s words fresh in my mind, I would like to thank 
those individuals in my life whom I might take for granted. At 
the top of that list is my husband, Jim. We are heading towards 
our 36th wedding anniversary this July, and a girl could not ask 
for a more supportive and committed partner in life. He does all 
the grocery shopping in our household, and much more, so 
much more that one of my nicknames by colleagues here is the 
pampered MLA. 
 
Jim and I have been blessed with three daughters, even more 
blessed that two have made Saskatoon their home. Our oldest, 
Amy, is married to Karl, and they are parents to three of our 
grandchildren: Gianna, Isabella, and Lukas. I am grateful that 
they chose names for their children that are manageable to spell 
and pronounce. Amy has earned a chartered professional 
accountant designation and is an auditor with Canada Revenue 
Agency. Karl is a journeyman mechanic. They are co-owners of 
Market Mall Auto Service in Saskatoon and have joined the 
large number of entrepreneurs across this province. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Monique, our middle daughter, is mother to 16-month-old 
Sebastian. Monique is a lawyer and will be returning to the 
workforce in the near future. She is married to Aaron who is 
full of entrepreneurial spirit and always planning his next 
adventure. Mr. Speaker, our youngest daughter, Janelle, is 
currently in Edmonton working for the Government of Alberta 
after completing a Master of Public Administration at the 
University of Saskatchewan. Like so many of my fellow MLAs 
who are grandparents here, Jim and I are enjoying the little ones 
and our family circle of love continues to grow. 
 
I would like to acknowledge the work that my constituency 

assistant, James Hawkes, does on my behalf. We have a busy 
office with constituents dropping by, emailing, and phoning 
with comments or needing assistance, and James helps me with 
it all. He has a solid understanding of government and how 
ministries work as he spent two summers in this building, Mr. 
Speaker. He was completing a double majors degree at the 
U of S that included political studies at that time. 
 
I am fortunate, Mr. Speaker, to have a great group of volunteers 
who offer support to me as members of the Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood Constituency Association. My association 
is led by Robin Mowat who serves as our capable president. We 
get the work done, but we also focus on having fun along the 
way. The association serves as a good source of insight and 
advice to me on behalf of the residents of my constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to share something that I read in the 
December 2017 edition of the Reader’s Digest. Different 
authors were asked to pen advice that they wanted to pass on to 
their grandchildren in the year of Canada’s 150th birthday. One 
story that caught my attention was written by Rudy Wiebe. He 
shares with his grandchildren that their great-grandparents, his 
parents, had fled from Russia in 1929 because of violent 
revolution and religious persecution. He could not explain how 
4,000 Mennonites, including his parents and their children, 
were allowed to leave by train from Germany and were among 
a small group of 1,344 persons accepted by Canada. Rudy is the 
youngest of seven children and was born on their homestead in 
northern Saskatchewan, where the family ended up. 
 

My parents could never explain why they were seven of 
the few who “got out over Moscow” or why they were 
accepted as refugees by the best of all countries, Canada. 
 
Luck? They didn’t believe in it. They had faith in God, in 
the goodness of God’s mercy, in prayer, in the daily 
evidence of miracle. And because of that, they were 
thankful to God every day of their lives. 
 
My sweet grandchildren: through no effort of our own, we 
are blessed to live in a great nation of peace and human 
dignity. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I would add that we are blessed to live in a great 
province within a great nation. And I hope that Rudy is as proud 
of this province as I am vis-à-vis the adversity we have faced in 
the past 10 days. 
 
There are only so many choices, Mr. Speaker, the government 
has when it comes to balancing a budget in the face of revenue 
shortfalls. Like every business in this province and every family 
in this province, we have to face our fiscal situation head on and 
make the best choices we can for the benefit of all. 
 
We could look at tax increases, but we are not going to do that. 
There are no tax rate increases in this budget. Low personal and 
corporate income tax rates remain the same with no increases to 
the education property tax or provincial sales tax rates. We 
could look at service reductions, but we are not going to do that 
either, Mr. Speaker. We will continue to deliver high-quality 
services for Saskatchewan people. But what we have chosen to 
do and what the people of this province expect is to control 
spending while keeping our economy strong and returning to 



3814 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

balance in 2019-20. This budget supports our vision to ensure 
that Saskatchewan is the best place in Canada to live, to work, 
to start a business, to get an education, to raise a family, and to 
build a life. 
 
I would like to take the next few minutes to highlight some of 
the ways that the budget accomplishes this. There is a $2.8 
million investment that will fulfill this government’s 
commitment to provide individual funding for children with 
autism spectrum disorder. The initial funding of $4,000 per 
child under the age of six will be effective on July 1st of this 
year. This budget makes a $532,000 investment to create the 
universal newborn hearing screening program to provide babies 
born in Saskatchewan hospitals with a screening test to support 
early detection of hearing loss. This government will fulfill the 
final commitment to the Canadian National Institute for the 
Blind for vision loss rehabilitation services and equipment with 
funding of $500,000 which represents a $250,000 increase. 
Supports for autism, hearing loss, and vision loss — all 
examples of how this government supports our vision as the 
best place to live and raise a family, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our government continues to invest in supports for those most 
vulnerable, children in need of protection, at-risk families, 
people with disabilities, seniors, and those experiencing low 
income. We continue to help people in need. The increase of 
$54 million in the social services budget includes 10.4 million 
for community-based organizations and caregivers; 8.2 million 
of that will be targeted to those providing direct daily care of 
those with intellectual disabilities and/or mental health 
challenges. The remaining 2.2 million will help foster families 
and others providing daily care to children in need of protection 
as well as families needing intensive supports. In this budget 
there’s an additional $700,000 for children and youth with 
exceptional medical and behavioural challenges, and 4.5 million 
for extended family members caring for at-risk children and 
youth. 
 
Two major hospitals in this province, the Jim Pattison 
Children’s Hospital in Saskatoon and the Saskatchewan 
Hospital North Battleford, are on track to open by the end of 
next year. There is a continued phase-in for doctors, nurses, and 
other health care professionals for the children’s hospital. And 
the new facility in North Battleford is a significant commitment 
to improve mental health — more examples, Mr. Speaker, of 
how this government supports our vision to ensure that 
Saskatchewan is the best place in Canada to live, to raise a 
family, and to build a life. 
 
The Saskatoon Housing Corporation will launch the seniors’ 
education property tax deferral program this month. 
Approximately 1,600 low to moderate senior homeowners will 
be able to defer the education portion of their property taxes 
through a repayable loan, giving them more financial flexibility 
and helping them stay in their homes longer. 
 
Education in this province will see an increase of $30 million in 
operating funding over last year. This will allow school 
divisions to support students in the classroom by hiring up to 
400 teachers and other education support staff. The education 
budget of $2.5 billion will see nearly 50 million for preventative 
maintenance, renewal, and emergency funding, which is a 14.8 
per cent increase over last year. 

There is inclusion of the 20.8 million in new funding from the 
federal government through the recently signed 
Canada-Saskatchewan Early Learning and Child Care 
Agreement. This child care funding will allow for the continued 
support of 16,000 licensed child care spaces with provision for 
an additional 2,500 licensed child care spaces by 2020. 
 
This government has reaffirmed that boards of education will 
continue to have the responsibility to make decisions on how to 
allocate funding and make expenditure decisions that meet local 
needs. 
 
In a news release from the Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association, Dr. Davidson, president of the SSBA said that, and 
I quote, “Boards see the efforts made this year to reprioritize 
funding for education as critical to supporting continued 
progress in the area of student achievement.” 
 
I’m excited that student financial literacy has been added to the 
provincial K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] curricula. I 
brought forward this resolution to the SSBA when I was a 
trustee. Little did I know that one day I would be including this 
as part of my recommendations as Legislative Secretary for 
curriculum development and consultation to the Minister of 
Education. I am hopeful that financial literacy will help to 
mitigate the growing levels of personal debt in our country. I 
am also hopeful that it will assist the future entrepreneurs of this 
province as we provide a financial foundation of knowledge for 
our students as they graduate from our schools. This is 
supporting our vision that Saskatchewan is the best place in 
Canada to get an education. 
 
As part of this year’s budget, there is an addition of $250,000 
being allocated to the Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership, which will be targeted to programs that directly 
support the efforts of Saskatchewan exporters to increase 
activity in both new and existing markets. More than 100,000 
jobs in this province depend on exports. We need to protect 
those jobs and expand our access to export markets around the 
world to create new jobs. 
 
We export more per capita in this province than any other. We 
export energy products, agricultural products such as meat and 
grain, forestry products, mining products, and manufactured 
goods. We export those products to about 150 countries all 
around the world. We will continue to take steps to increase the 
value of all these exports so that we can continue to grow the 
opportunities for jobs in our communities. As we increase our 
export wealth, we will enhance our population growth as well. 
 
This government is introducing the Saskatchewan value-added 
agriculture incentive to help foster a competitive business 
environment in the province and improve investment attraction 
and retention outcomes. The SVAI [Saskatchewan value-added 
agriculture incentive] creates a 15 per cent non-refundable tax 
credit for new or existing agriculture facilities and makes a 
minimal capital investment of $10 million to expand productive 
capacity. 
 
This budget announces the creation of the Saskatchewan 
technology start-up incentive, a two-year pilot project that 
provides a tax credit of 45 per cent to be applied to investments 
made in eligible Saskatchewan-based corporations. This 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3815 

incentive will create conditions for the continued rapid growth 
and success of newly emerging technology companies. The tech 
sector is the fastest growing sector on the TSX [Toronto Stock 
Exchange], and we plan to be a major player in this burgeoning 
sector as we introduce the most aggressive investor tax credit 
for tech start-ups in Western Canada. 
 
Doug Konkin, Chair of the Saskatchewan Capital Network, 
stated, “We are confident that this tax credit will give more 
people the incentive required to become investors resulting in 
positive economic spinoffs for the province.” Women 
Entrepreneurs Saskatchewan CEO Prabha Mitchell is quoted as 
saying, “Not only will this new tax rebate foster 
entrepreneurship and innovation in Saskatchewan, it will 
undoubtedly lead to a more diverse economy and the creation of 
new jobs in the tech sector.” These tax incentives support our 
vision to ensure that Saskatchewan is the best place in Canada 
to start a business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one fact that I would like to note is that 
non-renewable resource revenue now accounts for just 10 per 
cent of the province’s total revenue. In 2008-2009 it accounted 
for a high of 32 per cent. This is a major step forward by our 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite have gone so far as to call 
small-business owners and entrepreneurs elites. The NDP 
Finance critic has stated “. . . professional corporations like 
lawyers or physicians or surgeons who do not typically have a 
lot of employees.” Well I was just recently at a surgeon’s office 
and I think I counted over 10 employees, so I take exception to 
that. 
 
With 98 per cent of all businesses in Saskatchewan and over 80 
per cent of job creation in this province coming from small 
business, those businesses drive a large part of our province’s 
economic activity. Thankfully this government recognizes the 
major contribution that small-business owners make to this 
province. 
 
I read a column published in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix on 
November 3rd of last year that resonated with me. It was 
written by John Gormley, and here are some of his thoughts: 
 

For generations, the quietly proud and hardworking people 
of this province convinced ourselves that remarkable or 
even good things happened somewhere else . . . 
 
Over the past decade, as the world discovered 
Saskatchewan, we decided to change and ultimately leave 
tradition behind, from our political choices to a braver, 
more robust and confident view of our place . . . 
 
By any objective criteria, from dramatically reduced health 
care waiting lists to health, education and social spending 
that have exceeded historic growth rates, Saskatchewan is 
not in trouble . . . 
 
The staples of the economy — agriculture, oil/gas, potash, 
uranium and manufacturing — are cyclic, but increasing 
demand in a growing world and the value and quality that 
we add to our resources is improving Saskatchewan’s 
prospects . . . 

Governments do not generally make things happen but 
they can foster the environment and provide the catalyst 
for empowered citizens, investors and newcomers to create 
change and improvement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what this Saskatchewan Party government 
has done over the last decade. Marilyn Braun-Pollon, the 
vice-president of the Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business for the Prairies, stated in a news release: 
 

We knew this would be another tough budget, but 
Saskatchewan entrepreneurs will be relieved that the 
provincial government’s budget did not shock the 
economy . . . 
 
We welcome the government’s plan to reduce the size of 
government, through finding efficiencies and workforce 
attrition . . . 

 
[15:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, shortly after our new Premier was chosen, one of 
his first messages was: 
 

I’m optimistic about what’s to come in Saskatchewan, and 
we must always remember the progress we have made in 
the last decade. After years of decline under the NDP, our 
province is now and can forever be the very best place to 
live, work, and raise a family in Canada. We can chart our 
own course. We can chart our own future. This time in 
Saskatchewan, right now, belongs to us, the people of 
Saskatchewan. We will not let the NDP throw obstacles in 
our way, and we will continue to tell the Saskatchewan 
story around the world. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I appreciated the words that our new Lieutenant 
Governor, Tom Molloy, spoke at his installation ceremony on 
March 21st, and I quote: 
 

We are fortunate to live in a province that is as diverse as 
our country. I have always loved our provincial motto, 
“from many peoples, strength.” Our people are indeed our 
greatest strength. We are an innovative and tolerant people 
who want to live in peace and harmony with one another, 
and with this magnificent terrain that we call home. We 
value equal rights and opportunities for all. We look for 
input from all of our citizens. Simply put, we are stronger 
when we work together. 

 
As citizens of this province, we all want the same things — a 
strong economy, opportunities for our young people, a good 
health system, a good education system, good highways, 
looking after the vulnerable. As one of my colleagues aptly 
describes, citizens want a job, a school, a hospital, and a road to 
get there. Three-quarters of all government expenditures are in 
the ministries of Health, Education, and Social Services. We 
enjoy a good quality of life in this province, but our expenses in 
these human service areas continue to climb. This government 
is doing its very best to meet those increased needs. I 
acknowledge that there is more work to be done, more 
challenges to tackle, but we are keeping on track. And we are 
keeping on track without adding a federally imposed carbon 
tax. 



3816 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

The goal to balance the budget in 2019-20 ensures the 
long-term sustainability of the services and programs that 
people in this province value. Staying on track ensures that 
investments in infrastructure including hospitals, highways, and 
schools continue this year and into the future. This government 
is making every effort to ensure that we are fiscally responsible 
and ensure that the investments that we have enjoyed over the 
past decade continue into the future. God bless our 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the budget motion made by 
the Minister of Finance. I will not be supporting the amendment 
made by the member from Saskatoon Nutana. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. First of all, I want to . . . I expected the Speaker to be 
sitting in his chair, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wanted to wish him 
good luck in his new and very important role. He’s a patient 
man, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which is going to stand him in very, 
very good stead sitting in that chair. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, before I begin my formal remarks with 
respect to the budget, I do want to provide a few thanks, Mr. 
Speaker, as is customary. First of all, Mr. Speaker, to my 
constituency assistant. In my ministerial responsibilities as the 
former attorney general and minister of Justice, and now in my 
role as the Education minister, Mr. Speaker, I don’t spend as 
much time in my constituency office as I’d like, Mr. Speaker. 
And so I’m very thankful to my constituency assistant, Sara 
Briggs, for holding down the fort, Mr. Speaker. So I want to 
express my thanks to her for that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with respect to my office staff up in room 
366, to my chief of staff, Julie Leggott; to my MAs, Max 
Waldman, Aidan Katz, and Lacy Orange; and to my 
administrative support, Dawn Cherkewich and Kielle Schmidt, 
Mr. Speaker, my thanks as well. They make me look good 
every day, Mr. Speaker, and I have to thank them for that. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, with respect to my executive, I’ve been 
. . . the great honour of representing the constituency of 
Saskatoon Northwest now since 2010, Mr. Speaker, and I can’t 
do a very good job of that without having a strong executive. 
And I wanted to thank my president, Doug Shaw, and in 
particular, my finance support staff, Ray Sladek, Mr. Speaker, 
for their support, and everyone else that serves on my executive 
and helps out on that side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, for five months beginning in September, I 
spent five months travelling around the province meeting 
people in Saskatchewan, being invited into their homes, Mr. 
Speaker. I did that with a number of my colleagues on this side 
of the House in seeking the leadership of our party, Mr. 
Speaker. And I wanted to thank the people of Saskatchewan 
who welcomed me into their home and who wanted to sit and 
have conversations, Mr. Speaker, about the future of 
Saskatchewan. So I’m very thankful for that, all who supported 
me, Mr. Speaker, and all those that participated in our 
leadership campaign. 
 
I specifically wanted to thank Megan Rumbold and Jim Kerby, 

who served as my campaign chairs, Mr. Speaker; my campaign 
manager, Terri Harris; and Doug Shaw, who spent countless 
hours with me, Mr. Speaker, driving me around the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I specifically wanted to thank my colleagues on this side of 
the House who participated in this grand adventure, Mr. 
Speaker. It was really quite an accomplishment and I think 
they’ll agree with me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we had no 
regrets with respect to the participation in that leadership, Mr. 
Speaker. I certainly don’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank my colleagues on this side of 
the House for all the support that they provided me in my 
ministerial responsibilities. I’m very thankful for that, Mr. 
Speaker, especially the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to just acknowledge my family. Mr. 
Speaker, my wife Christine, who’s an entrepreneur well known 
to most people in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. I’m very proud 
of the fact she’s the incoming chair of the Canadian 
Pharmacists Association and she’s the North American 
representative, Mr. Speaker, on the world pharmacy conference, 
which is quite an accomplishment for her, Mr. Speaker, to 
represent North America in a very elite group of individuals 
dedicated to advancing the interests of pharmacy around the 
world. Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of her. 
 
To my children, to Jeremy and Kayla and Allison and Stephen, 
who’ve been very, very supportive. Of course we all know that 
we can’t do this job, Mr. Speaker, without the support of our 
families. So I’m very thankful to them for standing beside me, 
not just since I was elected, but through the leadership 
campaign, Mr. Speaker. It’s been just a joy to have them and 
have their support, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, just to my remarks, Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to the budget, it’s my pleasure to rise for the first time to 
do this budget reply as the Minister of Education, Mr. Speaker. 
And I do want to thank the Premier specifically, Mr. Speaker, 
for having confidence in me to take on this important 
responsibility. I’m truly humbled by the confidence that he’s 
shown in me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education is one of this government’s main 
priorities. As I have said before, not a wheel turns in this 
province without education, and I continue to believe that now 
that I have for the last few months as my role as the Minister of 
Education. Each year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, tens of thousands of 
Saskatchewan children are welcomed through the doors of our 
schools and into the care of our teachers and support staff. And 
during the time that they are with us, we have these students’ 
futures in our hands and it’s a tremendous responsibility. 
 
So what will we do for those futures, Mr. Speaker? What will 
this government do to meet the challenges of funding our 
province’s school divisions, of investing in our schools that our 
children learn in, of providing for the youngest and most 
vulnerable in our education system, of ensuring that each of our 
precious children leaves our classrooms with heads held high 
and a bright future ahead? These are among the questions I will 
answer today, Mr. Speaker, and that will be answered in this 
government’s budget throughout the year. 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3817 

Last week my colleague, my good friend, the Minister of 
Finance rose in her place in this legislature to deliver a budget 
that’s focused on keeping Saskatchewan on track by controlling 
spending, delivering high-quality services for Saskatchewan 
people, keeping our economy strong, and returning to balance 
in 2019-20. This budget is faithful to that goal, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but not also without increasing our commitment to 
education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Premier promised to reinvest in education 
while we were on the campaign trail as candidates for the 
leadership of our party. And I’m proud that soon after the race, 
I joined our Premier to confirm that our government would be 
investing 30 million new dollars into education in 
Saskatchewan for the 2018-19 school year. That $30 million 
will have a real impact on our classrooms. 
 
For proof of this, look no further than the impact of the 
immediate infusion of seven and a half million dollars into the 
school division for the final quarter of ’17-18. We moved ahead 
immediately with a seven-and-a-half-million-dollar investment 
because we heard loud and clear from our sector partners, from 
parents, and from students about the need to support the 
classroom. This has allowed divisions to begin investing right 
away across the province. 
 
For example, Regina Public worked to hire 32 educational 
assistant FTEs alone, while Saskatoon Public has hired 10. $30 
million, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the equivalent of 400 new staff, 
whether educational assistants, teachers, or other classroom 
support, wherever divisions identify their greatest need. 
 
This government’s support for school division independence — 
because we fully recognize that school divisions are in the best 
position to identify and respond to student needs — is very 
much unlike the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. For instance, 
the Leader of the Opposition has proposed in his leadership 
platform to decide the best mix of teachers and educational 
assistants, not the school divisions who currently do that very 
important task. He wants to decide how many resources the 
divisions need to provide before- and after-school programs, not 
the divisions who currently decide that. He wants to decide how 
best to combine many learning spaces into one school, not the 
school divisions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who know their students’ 
needs best. 
 
We’re thankful to school divisions for their co-operation and 
feedback as we work to ensure that funding is distributed fairly 
to ensure that student needs are at the forefront of all decisions. 
Moreover, our government announced that overall funding for 
education is $2.5 billion to support our pre-kindergarten to 
grade 12 classrooms, as well as early years child care, libraries, 
and literacy. 
 
This budget therefore joins a long line of Saskatchewan Party 
budgets that have made record investments in education here in 
this province. Over 10 years since we took government, we’ve 
invested over $20 billion in education. We’re proud of our 
record and excited to continue our work in this and future 
budgets. 
 
The ministry’s budget also reflects the change to provincial 
collection of education property taxes. As well, EPT [education 

property tax] rates will remain unchanged in the ’18-19 budget 
year. 
 
Overall funding for school divisions includes $1.87 billion in 
school operating funding for the ’18-19 school year, $76.4 
million in capital funding, and $418.9 million for teachers’ 
pensions and benefits. 
 
Included within this year’s school operating funding is $282.7 
million for supports for learning. This money is nearly 15 per 
cent of our overall education budget, earmarked specifically for 
K to 12 and early-entrance students that require additional 
supports. Yet regardless of how much money we provide to 
school divisions for their operation, none of it will have much 
of a difference if our students don’t have schools to learn in. To 
that end, this year’s budget provides $76.4 million in capital 
funding. 
 
We’re especially excited to announce record prevention, 
maintenance, and renewal and emergent funding budgets, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Together these budgets are just shy of $50 
million, a nearly 15 per cent increase over the ’17-18 funding 
for those items. Both of these budget items are critical for 
maintaining quality school learning environments for our 
precious children. Preventative maintenance and renewal 
provides divisions with money for regular renovations and 
maintenance to pre-empt failures, while emergent funding 
exists to provide resources to fix disasters as soon as they occur. 
 
Since 2007 we’ve invested over $200 million across both these 
budget items. Meanwhile, members opposite invested a grand 
total of zero dollars while they were in government. This budget 
also includes $22.7 million to advance two ongoing school 
consolidation projects in Rosthern and Weyburn. 
 
To meet fiscal challenges, we must balance competing 
priorities. At this time our focus is on preserving and 
rejuvenating our government’s record capital investments. 
Moreover, despite this focus on fiscal responsibility, our 
government is still investing more into capital than our 
neighbours are. Our per-student investment in capital is $275 
compared to only 163 in Alberta. 
 
We’re also providing $3.1 million for relocatable classrooms. 
This will allow for the purchase of six new classrooms and 15 
moves to accommodate the growing needs in our province. 
These are priorized to schools with the highest need. With 
today’s capital investment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this brings the 
Government of Saskatchewan’s overall investment in school 
infrastructure since November of 2007 to approximately $1.56 
billion, over five times as much as the NDP invested over the 
same period of time. 
 
Ensuring equitable outcomes and improved student 
achievements for First Nations and Métis students continues to 
be a priority of this government. With this in mind, we are 
continuing our investments to respond to the recommendations 
made by the joint task force for improving First Nations and 
Métis education and employment outcomes. The government’s 
overall investment has been maintained at $6 million to 
continue this important work, with $5.1 million of that money 
being directed toward education. The remaining $900,000 is 
being invested through the Ministry of Advanced Education. 



3818 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, our ministry’s investment of $5.1 million 
will include $2.4 million to continue the 16 invitational shared 
services initiatives; 1.6 million for the continued 
implementation of Following Their Voices; $1 million for the 
expansion of Help Me Tell My Story and Help Me Talk About 
Math; and just over $100,000 to continue Microsoft software 
licensing on-reserve. 
 
[16:00] 
 
The ’18-19 budget continues to provide $3.8 million in funding 
to targeted innovation, accountability, and promised practices 
that directly impact educational opportunities for First Nations 
and Métis students. This funding will enable school divisions to 
continue to actualize their First Nations and Métis education 
plan in order to improve student literacy, numeracy, and 
engagement. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know this is the key to 
reaching our overall goals as set out in the plan for growth and 
the ESSP [education sector strategic plan] of improving the 
disparity between graduation and engagement rates of our First 
Nations and Métis students with their non-First Nations and 
Métis counterparts. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is also $500,000 in funding for 
summer literacy camps that support the higher achievements of 
all students but especially that of First Nations and Métis 
children by providing rich learning experiences during July and 
August. These literacy camps are important because they 
improve literacy as a priority across our province. That’s why 
this budget maintains library and literacy funding province wide 
at current levels. 
 
Last budget, we heard from the people of Saskatchewan. We 
heard how much they value their local libraries. That’s why 
library funding was included in the base budget through this 
’18-19 budget process. Therefore in this budget, library funding 
remains at $11.1 million while literacy funding remains stable 
at $1.5 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this brings me to the subject of early years and 
child care. These programs provide care for among the youngest 
and most vulnerable in our province. It is crucial to the 
well-being of this province that governments adequately invest 
in these sectors. Yet for decades, successive governments, most 
of them formed by members opposite, failed in this regard. I 
confirm from none other than Pat Atkinson, the former NDP 
minister of Finance, who stated that “I was part of a 
government that did not put a lot of resources into child care.” 
These are unfortunate words, Mr. Speaker, to hear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re not so complacent in this government. For 
10 years we have invested hundreds of millions of dollars into 
early years and child care in Saskatchewan. We’ve invested the 
funds to create over 8,500 child care spaces. We’ve more than 
doubled the number of pre-kindergarten programs. And we’ve 
expanded the investment in early childhood intervention 
programs by 34 per cent. And this year, Mr. Speaker, we 
presented a record-setting early years in child care budget of 
over $100 million. This is the first time the province has ever 
cracked the $100 million threshold in this sector and we can all 
be proud of this accomplishment. 
 
This year’s budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, provides $76.8 million 

in funding for child care, including the $20.8 million federal 
investment through the Canada-Saskatchewan Early Learning 
and Child Care Agreement that I had the pleasure to sign last 
month. Mr. Deputy Speaker, our province is very grateful to the 
federal government for their investment in early learning and 
child care within Saskatchewan. With the federal government, 
we have developed very specific guidelines for these 
investments, focused on the zero-to-six age group and primarily 
on those who are most vulnerable. 
 
As part of the agreement, we will be investing in creating pilot 
programs for children who are deaf and hard of hearing. We 
will work with stakeholders in the deaf and hard-of-hearing 
community on what this pilot could look like. There will be 
opportunities for divisions to put forth proposals that will 
further enhance supports for kids with intensive needs when we 
get to the RFP [request for proposal] stage. 
 
Regina and Saskatoon divisions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have 
already begun the great work on piloting a new early years 
intensive support pilot, a program for preschool-aged children 
experiencing disability. We look forward to hearing the 
feedback on how this pilot is working within our already 
successful pre-K [pre-kindergarten] programs. 
 
The federal investment will also allow for the creation of an 
additional 2,500 licensed child care spaces by 2020, including 
centre- and home-based spaces and 65 francophone spaces. 
 
We also know that in addition to high-quality spaces, young 
learners need high-quality educators. This is why we’re also 
investing in additional training and resources for our child care 
providers. It is our hope that these investments in our youngest 
residents will also positively impact them as they grow and 
develop into school-aged students and beyond. 
 
We continue to fund the child nutrition program with an 
investment of $2.3 million to ensure that students are properly 
nourished and able to focus on learning. This year’s budget also 
provides continued funding for KidsFirst at $15.5 million and 
early childhood intervention programs at $3.9 million. 
 
Finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget provides $20.5 million 
to continue to support 316 pre-kindergarten programs serving 
more than 5,000 three- and four-year-olds around the province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, earlier in my remarks today I asked some 
questions of our government’s commitment to education in 
Saskatchewan. I asked questions I’m sure parents and 
concerned citizens across this province are no doubt wondering 
as they hope for the best for their children, who are our future. 
I’m thankful, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the answers to these 
questions are clear and leave no doubt our government is 
committed to public education. 
 
A few days ago some members opposite suggested this budget 
failed, signalled a failure to invest in the children of 
Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to reply to this 
allegation and answer the questions, let me tell you that this 
government is actually investing. 
 
This government is investing 30 million new dollars in our 
school divisions so they can provide a quality education to each 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3819 

of our province’s students. This government is investing in the 
largest ever budget of preventative maintenance and renewal so 
our schools can be excellent, as excellent as our students. And 
this government is investing in our largest ever combined 
budget for child care and early learning, the first time ever 
cracking the $100 million barrier so that our youngest and most 
vulnerable receive the education and the foundation of a future 
they deserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re all in this together across this province 
when it comes to providing for our children and providing for 
their education. 
 
The moment a child is born is a moment of impenetrable, 
unbridled, bewildering joy. Through almost two decades as we 
parent and raise our children, we nurture their hopes, engage 
their curiosity, and strengthen their courage. Each moment is a 
gift to cherish and each child is more precious. Mr. Speaker, 
that is what we are responsible for in the education sector. We 
must never lose sight of what the real priority is, and I’m proud 
to say that this budget keeps that priority squarely in our sights, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are on track. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to say that I’ll be supporting the budget and not 
supporting the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Hindley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s an 
honour to participate in the budget debate today. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity on a few occasions to stand in 
this Chamber and make remarks, but we’ll refer to this as my 
maiden speech in the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I get into the formal context of my 
remarks, I’d just like to take this opportunity again to extend 
my condolences to everyone who was impacted by the tragedy 
involving the Humboldt Broncos bus crash last week. It was a 
week ago today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we stood in this 
Assembly to speak to the condolence motion and to remember 
those who were lost and those who continue to fight in hospital 
recovering. And our condolences are extended to everyone who 
was impacted by that tragedy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I cannot stress enough how important and 
how honoured I am to be elected to stand as the representative 
of Swift Current in this Chamber, to be their MLA, for the 
constituents of Swift Current. I have a number of people to 
thank for this honour, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to take this 
opportunity to thank some of those people, most importantly 
my family, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’d like to thank my wife Anita, who . . . We’ve been married 
for a little over 10 years now and we were together a bit longer 
before that. And I just, I can’t thank her enough for her love and 
support as . . . well long-suffering, as the member for 
Moosomin points out, and that is correct. I wouldn’t disagree 
with that at all. I managed to trick her into marriage in 2007 and 
she perhaps is regretting that ever since. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also need to thank my two step-kids. Part 

of that deal when Anita and I got married was I was so fortunate 
to have the chance to have a couple step-kids. And Raven and 
Adler have been absolutely fantastic. They were eight and six 
years old when I got involved and we became a family, and I’m 
just so proud of them. They’re young adults right now, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Raven is currently overseas working in New Zealand right now 
on a farm project. And she’ll come back a little bit later this 
winter, but she’s enjoying her time over there. And my stepson 
Adler, you know, when he was younger, he was involved as a 
motocross racer. And we took him around the province and 
other parts of Western Canada, down to the States as part of 
that. And after travelling a little bit, he is now back home as 
well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I just want to thank Anita and 
Raven and Adler so much for all of their support through all 
this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I also need to thank my parents, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Thomas 
and Patricia Hindley. They were here for my swearing-in, 
sitting back over here earlier this session. Tom and Pat Hindley 
have been farmers from the Melfort-St. Brieux area their entire 
lives, and to be more specific, actually closer to Pathlow and 
Flett Springs. And they raised us four kids — I’m the oldest of 
four — to the best of their ability given, you know, we were a 
bit of a handful obviously. As any family would know, we spent 
just as much time fighting, I think, with each other as you do 
agreeing with each other and getting along. 
 
I have two younger sisters, Melissa and Erica, and my younger 
brother, Taylor. And they all kind of live up in that northeast 
area — Melfort, St. Brieux, Carrot River Valley area actually as 
well. And I just want to thank that part of my family for 
everything they’ve done for me and for being here for me as 
well. 
 
Family has been so important to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You 
know, when I was growing up, my grandfathers had both 
passed away so I didn’t really have a chance to know them. One 
had passed a year before I was born and the other shortly after. 
But my grandmothers were very close to us as a family, so I 
often think nowadays of my Grandma Hindley, my Grandma 
Kajner, and what they would think of what I’m doing today, 
and miss all the, you know, the encouragement that they gave 
us over the years and many valuable lessons that they taught us. 
 
Countless aunts and uncles, nephews, nieces, cousins, relatives 
— family is very important to us and we’d spend lot of time 
getting together, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at Christmastime and 
Thanksgiving, other times of the year, and that was very 
significant for us growing up. 
 
Not to single anybody out, but I should point out that there is 
one family member who may be watching today. I call her my 
aunt. She’s actually my cousin Darlene Campbell from Melfort, 
and she’s been a political junkie, I guess you could say, for as 
long as I can remember. And I think she’s probably quite 
enjoying this thing that I’m doing these days. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you get older . . . and I’ve been 
speaking about families. As you get older, your family grows. 
And that’s happening to me as well. I mentioned my sister 
Melissa. She had a baby 10 years ago, Elizabeth, who’s my 



3820 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

niece. And they enjoy coming down for the Swift Current 
Windscape kite festival, and they’re living up in that Carrot 
River area. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I talked about my stepson, Adler. 
And this past August he and his partner, Xuxa Bremner, gave 
birth to a baby boy. So that makes us grandparents which is . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Whoa. 
 
Mr. Hindley: — Yes, that is a whoa, isn’t it? It’s taking some 
getting used to. And actually just yesterday we had a chance to 
have a bit of a family barbeque. But eight-month-old Axel 
Alexander Irwin has been an absolute bundle of joy as well, and 
it’s been pretty cool to be a grandfather at this age. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was a long fall and winter of 
campaigning for me. This past August, my former boss decided 
that it was time for him to do some other things and, you know, 
if I could I’d just like to publicly thank him for the 
opportunities he gave me. Mr. Deputy Speaker, Brad Wall 
became more than just my employer, but he was a good friend 
and a mentor of mine. And I just can’t thank him enough for 
first hiring me in 1999 as his constituency assistant, but then in 
2006 he elected to have me serve as his executive assistant. And 
I’ve had so many opportunities over the last 18 years that he 
helped provide to me and I just, I want to thank Brad for 
everything he did for me over those 18 years that have led up to 
this point today. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the night of my by-election in Swift 
Current, I talked about the volunteers that I had helping out and, 
you know, as any of us know, it really does require a great team 
of volunteers and those that are willing to give up their time, 
their spare hours, to help you to get elected. I had a few of them 
here in the gallery for my swearing-in ceremony, so I’ve 
mentioned some of those folks on the record. 
 
But there was a handful there that weren’t able to make it, and 
I’d just like to point out a couple of those names just to get on 
the record: one of my campaign Co-Chairs, Trevor Moe, who 
came and talked to me a number of months ago about the 
possibilities here. And I just, I can’t thank Trevor enough for 
his support and encouragement and advice and counsel. And in 
addition to Trevor, his wife, Joy, who serves on a CBO 
[community-based organization] board back in Swift Current, 
she helped run the campaign office. And I just, I can’t thank 
Trevor and Joy enough. 
 
A couple other folks who were also involved in my campaign 
that weren’t here at my swearing-in are family friends actually, 
Jackie and Randy Maffenbeier, who have been friends of our 
family for a number of years and helped out during the 
campaign as well and, as I said, have been friends of our family 
for a long time also. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank my constituency 
assistant, Nola Smith, who has agreed to continue on in the 
capacity, operating and running the MLA office back in Swift 
Current. You know, in the 18 years that we’ve had that MLA 
office in Swift Current, we’ve only had three permanent, 

full-time constituency assistants. The first guy we hired in 1999 
wasn’t very good. He was marginal, sketchy at best, so we got 
rid of him. And then we hired Crystal Martens who’s a friend of 
mine, to be the CA there and she did that job for three or four 
years I think. Then Nola we hired in 2009. And Nola and her 
husband Dave and their family, Cadence, Chloe, and Colbi, 
they’ve become friends of ours. And as we all know, it’s pretty 
much impossible to be able to run that MLA office and to do an 
effective job as an MLA without having a dedicated and 
extremely competent constituency assistant. And I’m very 
proud to have Nola serving in that capacity. 
 
I think congratulations are in order, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for a 
couple of my colleagues as well who are here today, the 
member from Melfort and the member for Kindersley. You 
know, I’ve gotten to know them a little bit in the last number of 
weeks here. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are fine, fine 
gentlemen. They are men of character and conviction and I am 
so proud that I get the chance to serve with those two. I do 
apologize. Of the three by-elections, I’m the laggard of the 
group. Those two folks are up in the 80 per cent range and I had 
to fight through with about 73 per cent. So my apologies to my 
colleagues but . . . So anyways, Mr. Speaker, congratulations to 
the member for Kindersley and the member for Melfort. 
 
I’m honoured to have this opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
represent the people of Swift Current as we talk about the 
budget which was introduced in these Chambers just last week. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government in the past 10 years 
has made some significant investments into my constituency. 
I’ve talked about some of these before, but a number of them 
are fairly major investments such as the École Centennial and 
All Saints School in Swift Current, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Room 
for 1,000 students and replacing some long-standing schools 
which had outlived their useful life. The Meadows long-term 
care facility, 225 beds for the seniors of Swift Current and area, 
Mr. Speaker. That was a very, very big project for Swift 
Current and area. 
 
We’ve done a number of fairly significant highways projects 
and investments in Swift Current and area, Mr. Speaker. Most 
recently, there was some lighting improvement enhancements 
done on the No. 1 Highway corridor right through the city of 
Swift Current. We partnered with the city on that particular 
project to improve visibility. In 2009, we made an investment in 
the No. 1 and No. 4 interchange project to improve safety and 
traffic flow at that intersection. 
 
In opposition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we advocated for a truck 
climbing lane at Saskatchewan Landing Provincial Park that 
used to be in our riding. It’s on No. 4 highway, north of the city 
but climbing the hill, and there were some safety concerns 
there. We advocated for that in opposition, and when we had a 
chance in government we invested in that particular project. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, serving in government means being 
able to make difficult decisions. It’s not easy for a government 
to decide which projects and programs and services that you 
want to proceed with. And I’d like to thank the Minister of 
Finance and her officials for doing some great work on this 
budget, Mr. Speaker, because that’s not easy. 
 
And I think all of us in this Chamber, regardless of which side 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3821 

of the House we’re on, we strive to represent our constituents 
and to do what’s right for them. And part of that involves, you 
know, being open to talking to your constituents, being willing 
to listen to their concerns and see where you can find . . . 
You’re not always going to agree on everything, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But what you try to do is find out areas where you can 
compromise and provide the best possible service and represent 
your constituency. Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the end of 
the day, it’s taxpayers’ dollars. And that’s what we always have 
to remember, that when we make these decisions it’s with other 
people’s money. 
 
The 2018-19 budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, talks about some 
significant investments and all, you know, at the same time also 
keeping things on track. And that’s what’s important to 
remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When we embarked on this 
last year, this government decided that it would be an ambitious 
project, a three-year plan to get back to balance. And I’m proud 
to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that’s what this party on this 
side of the House, that’s what we are striving to do. And we’re 
on track to achieve that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, do that by year 
three. 
 
And in doing that, we realized that there were some difficult 
decisions to be made. For years governments of all stripes — 
and I would argue not just in Saskatchewan but, you know, in 
Western Canada — have relied quite heavily on resource 
revenues to help fund some of these projects. And what we 
decided as a government last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was to 
try and move away from that reliance on volatile resource 
revenues. And we’re down to, about 10 per cent of those 
revenues now come from resources. And that’s meant having to 
shift the income sources to more stable forms of revenue — 
income tax, corporate tax, consumption taxes, that sort of thing. 
 
And you know, while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, and talking 
about resources, I’d be remiss if I didn’t talk about the oil and 
gas sector in Swift Current and area. And you know, I’ve got 
friends who work in the oil and gas sector, people who are 
either directly or indirectly employed by that sector, and so the 
decisions we make are very important to them, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And on a couple of particular items I would point out 
that they are in favour of this government’s position. 
 
Number one is pipelines. They are in favour of our support for 
pipeline expansion to help get that product to market. And 
secondly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would also say that they are 
supportive of our position on the carbon tax, and as we continue 
to fight a federally imposed carbon tax recognizing that that 
would be devastating to the oil and gas sector. And they expect 
us to continue to fight that, meanwhile working on a 
made-in-Saskatchewan solution to climate change. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a plan and our plan is on track. 
And in this budget there are some significant investments that 
we have made. I’ll list just a few. 10.4 million targeted to 
people who provide direct daily care to those who have 
intellectual disabilities. Those are the folks working in CBOs 
and foster families that carry out this very important work. $2.8 
million, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in autism funding for families in 
this province and in my constituency have been advocating for 
this for a number of years. Over half a million dollars invested 
into the universal newborn hearing screening program in order 

to support early detection of hearing loss. $20 million in the 
final investment into the Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital in 
Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 34 million to complete the 
construction of the Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. 
 
And there’s some local highway funding. We’ve always got 
infrastructure projects, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In Swift Current, 
we’ve got some money invested to continue the work on the 
No. 4 Highway between Cadillac and Val Marie, and the people 
of Swift Current and southwest Saskatchewan, for them, that’s a 
very significant project. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, since the budget was unveiled last week, 
I’ve had the chance to go back to my constituency, as all of us 
have, to talk to our constituents. I attended a few events on the 
weekend and was in the constituency office on Friday. I talked 
to folks on the phone and via text message and other ways 
there, and by and large, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people that 
I’ve chatted with, they’re supportive of this budget, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They realize that we have a plan. They know that 
there’s difficult decisions to be made but they understand that 
we have a plan and that our plan is on track. And I think that’s 
what the people of Saskatchewan . . . I know that’s what my 
constituents, they expect. They want their elected 
representatives to reflect what they see in themselves, and I 
think that’s an important thing for all of us to remember on both 
sides of the House. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on this side of the House we’re going to 
continue to work for the people of Saskatchewan. And as I’ve 
said before, it’s an honour for me to be the MLA for Swift 
Current, to be their representative at this Legislative Assembly. 
There’s more work to do; there always is. But on this side of the 
House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a plan. That plan is on 
track, and we’re going to get back to balance within these three 
years. And I’m proud of that plan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the government’s 
budget and I will not be supporting the amendment proposed by 
the members opposite. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Corrections and Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I begin here 
tonight, I’d like to thank my colleague, Nancy Heppner, who 
graciously took my spot last Wednesday because I wasn’t able 
to do my response to the budget. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You can pay me in shoes. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Oh, and I can pay her in shoes, so we’re 
good to go. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Two pair. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Two pair. It’s a pleasure to be here tonight, 
today, in support of our government’s 2018-19 budget. I must 
begin with thanking Jackie in my constituency office; Adam, 
Shelley, and Ken in my ministry office. 
 
This budget shows that we have a plan — a plan to get back to 
balance, and a plan to invest in people. It is important to do 



3822 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

these two things together. Running massive deficits with no 
plan to pay for them isn’t just bad fiscal policy, it’s bad social 
policy also. 
 
Saskatchewan people know where we stand on the carbon tax, 
so I don’t need to get into that. Our government has . . . and will 
not support either the imposition or introduction of one in this 
province. 
 
This is the second time, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve had the pleasure 
to serve as the Minister of Corrections and Policing. And as the 
Minister of Justice said, that we are both recycled. 
 
As a retired first responder, Mr. Speaker, I must speak to the 
incident, the tragic accident that happened just outside of 
Humboldt or outside of Nipawin. I spoke at the STARS banquet 
this past Friday, and I was stating that the night that I received 
the phone call about the accident that had occurred, at that point 
in time we didn’t know what the severity was of the accident or 
exactly what happened. However I hung up from the phone call 
and I said a prayer, Mr. Speaker. I said a prayer obviously to the 
people that may be injured in this particular accident, and also a 
prayer of gratitude to our former colleague Rod Gantefoer and 
his wife, Carol. It was because of their passion and commitment 
to STARS that got this government to the point where we were 
able to support it financially. And as a result of our support 
financially to those people that work at STARS and the 
organization, other corporations, other organizations came on 
board to support it also. 
 
And I couldn’t . . . I knew, I knew if the accident was as severe 
as what it appeared to be, I knew what our first responders 
would be asked to do. I knew that these amazing men and 
women that respond or that choose this line of work are 
amazing. 
 
I know as a past, former, retired first responder, I never, ever 
liked or appreciated the word “hero” on any of it. It isn’t about 
that. I think I could speak on behalf of most first responders 
who perform this very, very necessary job in our society 
keeping our people safe, and they don’t want to be called 
heroes. They’re not heroes. They’re amazing people who do a 
very, very, very tough job. Most of us couldn’t do it. 
 
And I think that my sympathy and my thoughts and prayers of 
course go with the people and families of the Humboldt 
Broncos. And also as a part of that, my thoughts and my prayers 
will go and do go to the first responders, not just STARS but all 
the air ambulance, the firefighters that responded, the police 
who responded — all of them. All of them together are able to 
manage these horrific, horrific incidents. 
 
I was also speaking about, as a first responder, that these things, 
these incidents, these events that we witness stay with you for a 
lifetime. And I asked, and I know that the group that was there 
would do this, is to put their loving arms around everyone. And 
that includes the first responders, because the first responders 
are also going to need the love and attention that the families 
and loved ones of the ones that were involved in the accident 
will need. 
 
So we can’t, and I know none of us have, none of us have 
forgotten about those first responders. And you know, you 

talk . . . Those first, those responders are just . . . I don’t know. 
Words are indescribable, because you do not think about what 
you’re doing, other than you do it. You just go do it. And it’s 
usually, as with everything, it’s afterwards that you feel the 
effects. 
 
I know there are a number of difficult issues in my file as 
Corrections and Policing minister, but I believe that this budget 
takes important steps to address them. This year we are 
increasing our ministry’s budget by roughly 30 million or just 
over 8 per cent compared to last year’s budget. That’s just the 
money spent though. Really what’s the most important is where 
it is being spent and how it is going to benefit the people of this 
province. 
 
[16:30] 
 
I’d like to now speak about some of the important investments 
that we are making. I want to talk about Saskatchewan Hospital 
North Battleford, this project of our government we are very, 
very proud of, and of course that’s the new hospital in North 
Battleford. This year we are providing 1.061 million in new 
funding for this project. This funding will be used to open the 
second unit of 24 beds in a correctional wing of the facility 
early next year. We will be using existing funding to open the 
first unit of 24 beds later this year. 
 
Saskatchewan Hospital North Battleford will be focused on 
clients with mental health issues and will operate with a 
patient-centred philosophy. What this facility represents is a 
shift, Mr. Speaker. We are dealing with the root cause that 
many of our offenders suffer from, of course is untreated mental 
health issues. This facility is the first of its kind in this province 
and in Canada, and it is going to have a tremendous impact on 
these offenders. By focusing on improving their mental health 
outcomes, they will be better able to reintegrate into society and 
will also be less likely to reoffend and end up in our 
correctional system again. 
 
The opposition says this budget doesn’t invest, those are not 
investments. Well I have to ask them, how is supporting 
offenders with mental health issues, enabling them to 
reintegrate into their communities, and making them less likely 
to end up back in jails not an investment? Of course it is, Mr. 
Speaker. On this side of the House we believe that providing 
supports for offenders with mental health issues is not only an 
investment in their long-term well-being but an investment in 
the well-being and safety of all people in this province. 
 
I’d also like to talk about another important initiative our 
government is undertaking: reducing the use of short-term 
remand. The unfortunate reality is that 97 per cent of the growth 
in our adult custody population over the past 25 years is 
attributable to the growth in remand. Currently 40 per cent of 
our overall adult custody population is on remand. 
 
The overuse of short-term remand is not only expensive, but it 
also engages all aspect of the justice system — police, courts, 
and corrections. Our government recognizes that something 
needs to be done to make this correction. That’s why our 
ministry, in collaboration with the Ministry of Justice, is 
providing an additional 2.375 million to support and expand the 
remand initiative program in Saskatoon, Prince Albert, and 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3823 

Regina. This additional funding will be used to address the 
increased use of short-term remand by expanding the early case 
resolution from weekends to weekdays. By switching to 
weekdays, this will help reduce short-term remand and in turn 
also help to address our inmate counts. 
 
We know that the overuse of short-term remand not only costs a 
lot of money, but even more importantly, it risks exposing 
otherwise low-risk individuals to high-risk repeat offenders, 
which increases their risks of getting involved in more serious 
criminal activities. That represents a risk, not only to those 
individuals, but to the safety and security of their communities. 
That’s why the remand initiative is so important and why we 
are expanding it. 
 
Rural policing, of course we all have heard in the news over the 
past number of months about the issues surrounding policing or 
the crimes in rural Saskatchewan. We know that rural crime is a 
significant issue in our province, and our government is 
committed to continuing to provide the resources needed to 
address it. 
 
One of our top priorities is to ensure that the people of this 
province are safe and secure, regardless of where they live. That 
is why we are providing an additional 4.9 million to support the 
work being done through the rural crime strategy. This funding 
will be used to hire 30 new police positions across the province 
for the combined traffic safety Saskatchewan initiative, a key 
component of the provincial response team. 
 
We are also providing 1 million in continued annual funding to 
address other recommendations from the caucus committee on 
crime 2017. The opposition has said spending more on policing 
does not represent an investment. Well, Mr. Speaker, we know 
that, from what we’re hearing from those who live in rural 
Saskatchewan, both SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities] and the farmers and the communities, that 
them being safe, them feeling safe and secure is very important. 
As a result of it being important to them, it’s important to this 
government. 
 
The people in rural Saskatchewan are dealing with repeated 
instances of property crime and fear for the safety of themselves 
and their families. People that live in these particular areas 
agree that investment in security is an investment well spent. I 
don’t know what they are talking about, or where they are 
coming from, but on this side of the House, we take safety and 
security of everyone in Saskatchewan, regardless of where they 
live, very seriously. And we have, and continue to invest in that 
security. 
 
Overtime initiatives and staffing levels in our correctional 
facilities. We want to ensure that staffing levels are sufficient to 
handle actual inmate levels and their associated pressures in our 
facilities. We know that having the appropriate staffing 
complement improves that safety and security of staff, inmates, 
and the facility itself. That is why we are providing $11.4 
million to achieve that objective, making sure we have the right 
complement of staff. 
 
Capital projects. We are also undertaking or continuing a 
number of capital projects in our correctional facilities. These 
projects include installing trailers at the Paul Dojack Youth 

Centre, making a number of security enhancements in our 
correctional facilities, continuing to replace the kitchen at 
Prince Albert Correctional Centre. All of these projects are 
necessary to keep the staff, inmates, and facilities themselves 
safe and secure. These projects represent our government’s 
commitment to invest in important infrastructure, something 
that the members on the opposite side failed to do during their 
16 years in government. 
 
Reintegration programs of sentenced inmates. The one last 
initiative I’d like to touch on, the expansion of the reintegration 
program. We know that providing programming that helps 
inmates to reintegrate into their communities is good for them. 
And as they are more likely to become productive members of 
their community, it’s also good for the communities 
themselves, as it makes them healthier, safer places for people 
to live. 
 
I’d like to speak briefly about my constituency of Regina 
Wascana Plains. And this constituency, like many others 
throughout the province, has seen significant growth over the 
last 10 years, with new homes and neighbourhoods popping up 
every year. This growth is a good thing, but it also represents 
challenges. But that’s okay, I’d rather embrace the challenges of 
growth, rather than dealing with the challenges of no, or 
negative growth. Our government has responded to these 
challenges. 
 
My constituency. I can’t think of a better example of this than 
the Regina bypass. While we have talked lots about the 
economic benefits that this bypass will bring, I think it’s 
important to remember the safety benefits as well. Those safety 
benefits are just as important. This project is going to make 
travelling Highway 1 between Regina and Balgonie safer for 
thousands of people that travel every single day. I don’t think 
it’s a stretch to say that money spent on ensuring people are 
able to travel safely to and from work, or wherever they may be 
going, is an investment. 
 
The investments in education have been made and it’s very 
evident in my constituency as well: Emerald Ridge Elementary 
School in White City, École St. Elizabeth in the Greens on 
Gardiner, École Wascana Plains School in the Greens on 
Gardiner here in Regina. These schools represent an investment 
of our children’s future and make these communities a more 
attractive place for families to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has been investing in the people 
of this province for 10 years, and this budget is no different. 
That is why I am proud to support this budget. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to stand in my place today to give the address from the 
perspective of the opposition as to how we view this 
government, and in particular how we view their sorry excuse 
of a budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But before I go through that, Mr. Speaker, I want to say I’m 
very, very amused. I am very, very amused at how each one of 



3824 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

them backbenchers, they sit there and they read from their 
prepared script, and they haven’t deviated from that script at all. 
And . . . [inaudible] . . . very good, ladies and gentlemen, keep 
doing that and keep Saskatchewan going in the red. Keep 
Saskatchewan going in the red because that’s exactly what 
you’re doing when you sit on your hands and you get handed a 
piece of paper and told, read from the script, don’t deviate. And 
that’s a great injustice to not only your constituents but the 
people of Saskatchewan and the future, our children and 
grandchildren. 
 
But before I go on, Mr. Speaker, I want to be able to say hello 
to a few friends of mine. In particular I had a discussion this 
afternoon from a gentleman who I’ve worked with for many, 
many years. I want to say hello to a gentleman by the name of 
Robert Merasty. Robert is from my home community of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. And Robert is a great, well-known broadcaster. 
He’s one of the best in Canada and certainly the best 
broadcaster that I’ve ever heard when it comes to Aboriginal 
communications or indigenous communications, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve often referred to Robert as our Knowlton Nash of the 
Aboriginal community, the indigenous community. And he’s 
been one of the gentlemen over time that has had a very 
positive effect on me and certainly was a role model for me as I 
grew up in northern Saskatchewan, listening to him and Tom 
Roberts on the Northern News network. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
was so proud that this man was from Ile-a-la-Crosse who was 
being heard throughout northern Saskatchewan and the 
province in those early years, him and Tom Roberts. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that really stuck with me over my young life. And it’s 
such a pleasure knowing Robert and some of the work that he’s 
done. 
 
And many people don’t give him the credit that he deserves, 
Mr. Speaker, things like starting off the Missinipi Broadcasting 
Corporation. Make no mistake about it, Mr. Speaker. It was 
Robert Merasty that single-handedly developed Missinipi 
Broadcasting Corporation, Mr. Speaker. It was him in the early 
years. It was his dogged determination that made the Aboriginal 
network start. He gathered a bunch of leaders together to make 
sure this happened and, in some small way, Mr. Speaker, I 
helped in that regard. 
 
But let us rest assured, from the early years of northern 
broadcasting, Mr. Speaker, to the creation of MBC [Missinipi 
Broadcasting Corporation], of helping many communication 
stations throughout the North, let us be perfectly clear. There is 
one man that stood above the rest, and his name was Robert 
Merasty. And I want to say hello to him. 
 
And I did indicate to Mr. Merasty that I’d pay tribute to him in 
this budget speech because, Mr. Speaker, throughout the 
process of politics it is important that we get the message 
through to our people. And it is also important to recognize 
those means of communication which Mr. Robert Merasty 
achieved through English, and Cree in particular, was 
something that we need to constantly remind ourselves of as 
politicians, in the sense that there are people that play a vital 
link in making sure that we are communicating properly and 
fairly to the people through their skill and ability. 
 
I want to recognize his wife, Cheryl Michel, as well as some of 

his friends. He has a couple friends that he wanted to recognize 
from Pelican Narrows. There’s Mayor Ouide Michel and the 
councillors of Pelican Narrows and their administrator, Mrs. 
Doreen Linklater. Mr. Speaker, I did tell Robert I wanted to pay 
a little bit of tribute to him, and Mr. Speaker, those are some of 
the people that are supporting Mr. Merasty at this day. And 
certainly I would say to him that your skill and ability and all 
the friends that you surround yourself with in Pelican Narrows, 
Mr. Speaker, are also our friends, and that I wished him all the 
very best. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, getting back to the Saskatchewan Party 
budget, Mr. Speaker. And as I sit in the Assembly today and 
hear a lot of the messages of the Sask Party MLAs, Mr. 
Speaker, is how they try and rewrite history, Mr. Speaker, how 
their feeble attempt at trying to hide the facts from the people of 
Saskatchewan really aren’t going anywhere, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:45] 
 
And I tell the people this. I tell the people of Saskatchewan this. 
How is it that in 2007, that’s when the world was created 
according to the Sask Party. You will notice in all their 
conversations, Mr. Speaker, they never talk about pre-2007, Mr. 
Speaker, because they’re elected in 2007. They don’t want to 
talk about the fact that they inherited a booming economy. They 
inherited a bulging bank account. They inherited a growing 
population, and they inherited all this great wealth and 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let us be very clear to the backbenchers that are reading from 
their prepared texts. You had nothing to do with that. All that 
work was set up for you. You simply inherited. But today you 
want to claim it. That’s the problem with Sask Party politics, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And today, 2018, where are we, Mr. Speaker? Where are we? 
They have had record revenue. Let’s be clear, they’ve had 
record revenue. You’ve had record revenue. Never in the 
history of Saskatchewan have you had the record revenue that 
you’ve enjoyed the last 10 years. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Okay, well I certainly enjoyed coming back. 
Thank you for that opportunity. Let’s have a little order here. I 
recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — As I was so humbly pointing out, Mr. 
Speaker, they have had record revenue for the last 10 years. 
You had nothing to do with that revenue. You just came in to 
the government coffers. At the opportune time, you guys were 
elected government. Prior to that, you had nothing to do with it. 
You just sat there and the money showed up. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, last year they had a record tax hike — $1 
billion in tax hikes. There was not one tax that you guys did not 
touch. You jacked up every tax imaginable. Mr. Speaker, $1 
billion from what? From the conservatives, a billion-dollar tax 
hike. What’s up with that? From a right wing party, so to speak, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So having record revenues that they’ve inherited, having record 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3825 

tax increases, today, Mr. Speaker, in 2018, what do we have? 
Record debt. Record debt, that’s what we have in the province 
of Saskatchewan. And shame on the so-called right wingers 
over there. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the reason why they don’t want any of this 
information out, that’s why they keep talking about different 
things. They keep trying to distract the people of 
Saskatchewan’s attention. The reason why they do that, Mr. 
Speaker, it is consistent with conservative policy in practice of 
politics. Mr. Speaker. They are a one-trick pony, a one-trick 
pony. All they do is criticize the other parties. That’s all they do 
because, all of a sudden, there’s no attention on them. There’s 
no attention on them. Every conservative government that I’ve 
seen — going back to Grant Devine, going back to the Alberta 
government and the national federal Conservative government 
— they have driven every economy and every jurisdiction that 
they’ve governed deeper into recession and deep in debt. And 
Saskatchewan is in the same boat. 
 
So we know this from this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, as we get up 
and we talk about things that concern the people of 
Saskatchewan. Every single time these grown men and women 
across the way called the Saskatchewan Party caucus, they get 
up and they’re bewildered because we’re telling, hey folks, you 
guys are losing jobs. You’re losing a lot of jobs. They get up 
and they say, oh but it’s the NDP’s fault. Then they all clap and 
applaud. You’re a one-trick pony of criticizing the other party 
without coming up with any solutions on your own. It’s 
tiresome. The people of Saskatchewan are tired of this act of the 
Saskatchewan Party because . . . Focus on what your failures 
are. 
 
And again I go back to my point, Mr. Speaker. I go back to my 
point. You had record revenues. You’ve had record revenues. 
You’ve had record tax increases. You’ve had record tax 
increases, and yet today we have record debt. How does that 
work? How does that work? You have record debt. You have 
record debt. How does that work? You know why, Mr. 
Speaker? Because I’ve never met a conservative government 
that can’t manage their way out of a wet paper bag, Mr. 
Speaker. And the Saskatchewan Party is proving that in spades 
every single day, every single day. 
 
The member from Cannington was tripping from his chair 
during question period today, Mr. Speaker. He was there. He 
was there. He was there when they had the government rack up 
the debt prior to the NDP taking over. And, Mr. Speaker, it 
wouldn’t surprise him, it wouldn’t surprise him today if I told 
the people of Saskatchewan the debt that the government of the 
day had to face, and that was our former Premier Roy 
Romanow.  
 
Suppose today, suppose today, given the same prices we had, 
we were servicing the debt, Mr. Speaker, left behind by Grant 
Devine. And that service of just the debt, interest alone, was 
almost $900 million, Mr. Speaker. In translation of today’s 
dollars this Saskatchewan Party would have had to have paid 
$2.8 billion in interest payments alone. You don’t pay any of 
that. You don’t pay any of that because you were gifted a 
booming economy. You were gifted a growing population. You 
were gifted money in the bank. So the theory is you guys just 
sat along, and that includes your former leader, the former 

premier Brad Wall. Same thing. He just showed up and said, 
hey, look what we’ve got. And you know what our message 
was? Our message was, don’t mess it up. Don’t mess it up. That 
was our message. And what do you do? What do you do? You 
guys all messed it up. You all messed it up. 
 
So keep chirping from your chairs. Keep reading from your 
prepared notes. Keep trying to rewrite history. But today, but 
today, nobody can argue. You’ve had record revenue. You’ve 
had record tax increases — last year a billion dollars alone. And 
yet today we have record debt. So much for Tory math. And I 
say to you guys, shame on your inability to take that promise 
that Saskatchewan afforded you, the promise and opportunity 
that Saskatchewan afforded you, and how you’ve driven this 
province deep into debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now we’re seeing the P3 [public-private partnership] 
costings are going to come back to haunt us. The P3 costings, 
the cuts to health care, Mr. Speaker, cuts to education, people 
losing their jobs and losing their homes — these are serious 
matters that affect all of us, Mr. Speaker. The fact that you look 
at the tax increase of a billion dollars, a billion dollar tax 
increase. This is coming from right wingers, so to speak, Mr. 
Speaker. How do you guys manage a billion-dollar tax increase 
despite inheriting a booming economy and billions in the bank? 
How do you do that? Well, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the 
Assembly we say, that’s Tories for you. That’s how they 
manage the economy, that’s how they manage opportunity, and 
that’s how they manage promise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what happens, what happens in this Assembly, is they’ll get 
up and they’ll start railing against other parties because, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s all they can do. It’s a one-trick pony that people 
have seen time and time again. And I’ll say it again, 
Conservatives and Saskatchewan Party, you guys couldn’t 
manage your way out of a wet paper bag when it comes to 
managing a booming economy. You never have and you never 
will. You never have and you never will.  
 
And now today we’re trying to find out what’s on the chopping 
block next. What’s on the chopping block next? What Crown 
are you going to sell? What Crown are you going to sell to 
cover for your mismanagement, scandal, and waste? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, everything’s up for sale. I used to say wall-to-wall sale 
because that’s all our former premier wanted to do was sell off 
Saskatchewan’s future to back up his promises so he could 
continue trying to look good in front of the public. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I say to him today, as I say to the people of 
Saskatchewan and to the Sask Party caucus: was it worth it? 
Was all the manipulation, all the hidden debt, and all the fake 
promises, was it worth it? And I say to you today that no way 
was it worth it. We will be paying for your mismanagement, 
scandal, and waste for years and years and years to come. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going back to my earlier point. You had 
record revenue, you had a record tax hike, and that translates 
into record debt. Thanks a lot, Tories, for once again 
mismanaging our economy and mismanaging our future and 
mismanaging our whole province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s two areas I want to point out. The 
current Minister of Highways is here today, Mr. Speaker. And 
in his previous life he was president of SARM, Mr. Speaker. 



3826 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

And you know what? The Sask Party couldn’t move grain then, 
when he was president, but he was quiet. He sat on his hands. 
Like a good little student, he got a little pat from our former 
premier, Brad Wall, on his head saying, you just keep quiet 
because we don’t want you guys complaining about not moving 
grain. 
 
And today now he’s the Highways and Infrastructure minister, 
and guess what, Mr. Speaker. Still can’t move grain. Still can’t 
move grain, Mr. Speaker. So he comes into the Assembly here 
and I say to him, you were playing politics with the future of 
the producers of this province and you continue playing politics 
with the future of the producers of this province. You can’t 
move grain. 
 
And the other thing you can’t do, the other thing you can’t do is 
you can’t build a pipeline, Mr. Speaker. Brad Wall and 
company tried. Harper tried. No pipeline. No pipeline, Mr. 
Speaker. As we have said in this Assembly, and our leader 
articulated that today, articulated that today, is that there is a 
pipeline going to be built. We need to get our oil to market. We 
understand this on this side of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
Those folks don’t understand that on that side of the Assembly. 
 
Well the Minister of the Environment was chatting today about 
. . . He was chatting today about the carbon capture process at 
Boundary dam, Mr. Speaker. Do the people of Saskatchewan 
know this? And I’m going to ask the Minister of the 
Environment — he’s chirping from his chair — how much have 
we sent to Cenovus in the last three years as a result? How 
many millions have we sent to Cenovus as a result of not 
meeting our obligation on the CO2 volume? It’s millions of 
dollars, and you’re not paying that, sir. You know who’s paying 
that? The SaskPower people that are paying that. We are all 
paying for your mismanagement, scandal, and waste, Mr. 
Speaker. All of us are paying. 
 
But no, he doesn’t talk about that, Mr. Speaker. He doesn’t talk 
about the record tax increases, Mr. Speaker. He doesn’t talk 
about the record revenues they enjoyed. They’d rather talk 
about something else, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why the people 
of Saskatchewan, they look and they wonder, Mr. Speaker, how 
this Saskatchewan Party was able to survive. And, Mr. Speaker, 
the bottom line is they have manipulated the information 
coming forward. They have hidden much of our debt, Mr. 
Speaker. And they just simply refuse to accept their part and 
their responsibility of squandering opportunity after opportunity 
after opportunity. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, you’ll look at what is left. They had 
record revenues, they had record tax increases, and we have 
record debt. You put us into record debt, and that is your 
legacy. And that goes to the current Premier and the past 
premier. That is a legacy of the Saskatchewan Party 
government is that you guys enjoyed the largesse that no other 
government ever enjoyed in the history of this province and you 
squandered it. You spent every last cent. And not only did you 
do that, you turn around and you tax everything imaginable. 
That’s the tax-and-spend Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. 
And this is the bottom line is despite record revenue and record 
tax increases, we have record debt. We have record debt. How 
does that logic apply to the supposed conservative party 
government across the way, Mr. Speaker? It doesn’t make any 

sense. 
 
So I tell the people of Saskatchewan this: let us learn from our 
history. We’ve seen this act before, Mr. Speaker. We have seen 
this act before, and we have seen how they have squandered 
opportunity. But every time they get the message from the 
media, or they get the message from the opposition or from 
different groups that what they’re doing is terribly wrong, Mr. 
Speaker, one of them will get up and say, oh but the NDP are 
bad. That’s about the only thing they do. All of a sudden they 
all wake up. 
 
Well that one-trick pony, folks, is hurting the future of our 
province. That one-trick pony is squandering opportunity to 
build a strong future for our province. That one-trick pony 
doesn’t address the challenges in the indigenous community. It 
doesn’t move grain. It doesn’t get our oil to markets. That 
one-trick pony is tired but that’s all you have left in your empty 
tank, one little-trick pony. Let’s criticize the NDP and that’s 
good enough for the people of Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, that is not good enough. 
 
We need the pipelines to get our oil to market, Mr. Speaker. We 
need a good, solid transportation system to get our grain to 
market, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 5 p.m., this House stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3795 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3795 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3795 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3795 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3796 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3796 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Political Studies Student Receives Vera Pezer Award for Student Enhancement 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3796 
 Night With STARS Gala 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3796 
 Support for National Pharmacare Program 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3797 
 Rotary Badge Shield Star Dinner and Citizen Awards 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3797 
 Ability in Me Fundraiser Dinner 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3797 
 Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation Annual Convention 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3797 
 Community Production of Broadway Musical 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3798 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Response to Opioid Crisis 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3798 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3798 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3799 
 Government Action on Announced Initiatives 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3799 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3799 
 Global Transportation Hub 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3799 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3799 
 Emissions Reduction and Renewable Energy 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3799 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3800 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3800 
 Funding for Post-Secondary Education 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3801 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3801 
 Job Advertisements and Employment Numbers 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3802 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3802 
 Wait Times for Surgery 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3803 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3803 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3804 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3804 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY  
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3804 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3806 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3808 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3810 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3812 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3816 
  Hindley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3819 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3821 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3823 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


