


















































April 11, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 40A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 11, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3733 
 April 11, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 
to move a motion regarding question period. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 
leave to move a motion regarding question period. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Extension of Question Period 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 20(1) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
question period shall be limited to 30 minutes on session 
day no. 40 being Wednesday, April 11, 2018 through to 
session day no. 44 being Wednesday, April 18, 2018. 

 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 20(1) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
question period shall be limited to 30 minutes on session 
day no. 40 being Wednesday, April 11, 2018 through to 
session day no. 44 being Wednesday, April 18, 2018. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — All right, we’re at introduction of guests and, 
Mr. Premier, I’ll go first. That’s once I’m going to trump you. 
Thanks. Thanks, Mr. Premier. 
 
But today I’m pleased to welcome and introduce some special 
guests from Ignite Adult Learning Corporation, empowering 
Regina’s youth. They were visiting my office earlier today. 
 
When Ignite began in 1990, Regina was like every other 

community in Canada, home to young adults with potential who 
are living at the margins of society, trapped in generational 
cycles of poverty, illiteracy, social assistance, and addictions. 
They were not just unemployed; they were unemployable. 
 
Ignite opened its doors and began welcoming at-risk young 
adults who, in spite of the considerable barriers they faced, had 
both the desire and the potential to change the course of their 
lives and to build brighter futures for themselves and for their 
children. Ignite offers a trailblazing business entrepreneurial 
approach that enables their apprentices to heal, learn, and gain 
meaningful skills for employment and beyond. 
 
Today Ignite graduates have a strong sense of who they are and 
are becoming active, contributing members of society as 
employees, homeowners, volunteers, small-business employers, 
consumers, and taxpayers. Their children as well see the value 
of education and know that opportunities exist for them to live 
up to their potential and that the cycles of poverty, illiteracy, 
and unemployment are not inevitable. 
 
Apprentices from Ignite — and give us a wave when I say your 
name — Allyson Allary, Amanda Ball, Everett Alexson, 
Christian Smoke, Damion Counios, Dominique Maxie, Faith 
Nelson, Harras Lee Lonechild, Chris Thompson, Landon 
Cozma, Mathieu Kahnapace, Robbie King, Shawn Crassweller, 
Sterling Racette-Runns, Timothy Poitras-Kay, Travis 
Poitras-Kay, Tyler Moffatt, Tyson Worm-Sunshine. 
 
The staff of Ignite: Terina Shaw who’s a fundraiser, corporate 
liaison officer; Mona Hill, apprentice support services 
facilitator; Larry Smith, math and science facilitator; Lois 
McRae, administrative manager; Debby Adair, communications 
facilitator. Board members: Ken Shaw, Caron Hopfner, Syed 
Wajid Ali. 
 
I’d just ask all members, please join me in welcoming the Ignite 
apprentices, staff, and board members to their legislature. 
 
I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would like 
to join our Speaker of the House, through all members of this 
Legislative Assembly, in welcoming those members of Ignite to 
their Legislative Assembly here today, and also thank them for 
the effort and the work, and the productive work, producing 
results, Mr. Speaker. And changing people’s lives essentially is 
that result, Mr. Speaker, here in the community of Regina and 
across the province, Mr. Speaker. And I want to welcome each 
of them to their Legislative Assembly here today and thank 
them for their work that they continue to do. 
 
I also want to, while on my feet, Mr. Speaker, welcome through 
the members of this Assembly to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 
my constituency assistant from the community of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook, or the constituency of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. She lives in Shellbrook. She’s Ms. Sally 
Fitch, Mr. Speaker, and she runs our office there, runs it very 
efficiently as the MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
has been delinquent the last while, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And she has been a very good representative and contact on 



3734 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2018 

behalf of the constituents in the communities of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook, Mr. Speaker, and I thank her for that. And 
I would like to take the opportunity to congratulate her on being 
a new grandma. I wish all members to welcome Sally to her 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to take the 
opportunity to join the Premier and yourself, Mr. Speaker, in 
welcoming all of the staff, board members, and students — 
graduates — from Ignite learning centre corporation along with 
my colleague, the MLA for Regina Elphinstone, which I know 
is where your actual building is located. The two of us, as well 
as all the colleagues in the House, understand the importance of 
the work that you do in terms of helping people achieve their 
goals. 
 
I had the opportunity, with the Speaker, to attend your 
graduation ceremony a few months ago, and I think it’s fair to 
say, it was easily one of the most incredible nights of some of 
the most inspiring speeches I’ve ever heard, and they came 
from your graduates and your alumni. It was absolutely a 
wonderful, moving evening. And I’m so proud of the work that 
you’ve done, both the graduates as well as the staff. Looking 
forward to seeing where your lives go from here on out. So 
happy to see that you’re here this afternoon. And I’d like to ask 
all members join me in welcoming all of them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce, in your gallery, Prabha Mitchell, CEO [chief 
executive officer] of Women Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan 
which is based in my constituency of Saskatoon 
Stonebridge-Dakota. And two members of her team are with 
her today, Diane Souillet and Kaurie May. WESK [Women 
Entrepreneurs Saskatchewan], as it’s known, has some 800 
members, provides a wide spectrum of supports for women who 
are starting, buying, expanding, or growing a business. 
 
Over her diverse career, Prabha has led project evaluations, 
program reviews, authored research reports, and conducted 
numerous focus groups and consultations. A few years back she 
was a key player in leading the Certified General Accountants 
Association of Saskatchewan through a formative unification of 
the accounting profession which led to the creation of the 
Chartered Professional Accountants of Saskatchewan. She 
currently serves as a board member of Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic, Sask Housing Corporation, and the Saskatoon 
Public Schools Foundation. We thank her for all her great work. 
 
Please join me, Mr. Speaker, in welcoming Ms. Mitchell and 
her guests to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join — I still haven’t got over that voice thing — it’s my 

pleasure to join the minister in welcoming Prabha and her 
guests to the legislature here. I’ve had the opportunity to first 
meet Prabha when I was the Chair of Public Accounts, and 
actually we sat down when that legislation was being ushered 
through the House around accountants coming together as one 
body, and I appreciated her input then. 
 
But I’m especially appreciative of her work with Women 
Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan, particularly around supporting 
innovation by supporting women entrepreneurs, recognizing 
that we need to take a gendered lens when it comes to fostering 
innovation. We had an opportunity in the fall to meet with 
Women Entrepreneurs and Prabha just a few weeks ago, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Women Entrepreneurs does some wonderful work, and I know 
that we’re all, in this House, very appreciative of that. So with 
that, I’d like to welcome Prabha and her guests to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you 
and to you, I’d like to introduce my wife, Karen. Karen and I — 
if you’d give a wave, Karen — my wife and I have been 
married for 35 years this summer. And you know, we . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . She should get a medal for that, yes. 
So in those 35 years we raised three children together. The truth 
of the matter is, she probably did a lot more of that than I did.  
 
The beauty of our life right now is we have four grandchildren, 
which is the best part of life, in my opinion and her opinion as 
well. So please help me welcome Karen to her Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce Jamie 
and Kandis Brandrick, if you could give a wave. Jamie and 
Kandis are from the village of Borden. Kandis was the EMO 
[Emergency Measures Organization] coordinator during our 
flooding in 2013 and played a very pivotal role. And I want to 
always make sure that we recognize people that, you know, 
helped our province in that time of need. 
 
Jamie is the mayor of Borden. He has been for the last couple of 
years. He took over after the last mayor left a big mess there. 
That would be me. And Jamie is also a first responder and a 
firefighter and a hard-working guy trying to make our province 
better. Jamie was also a candidate for us in the last election. I’d 
like this Assembly to welcome them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar-Sask 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I would also like to introduce Jamie and Kandis Brandrick. 
I am their MLA and, as mentioned by the member from 
Saskatoon Westview, Jamie is the mayor of Borden. So please 
join me in welcoming Kandis and Jamie to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 



April 11, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3735 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you, I’d like to introduce a special guest in the 
House. And sometimes, you know, when we come in and we 
see people up in the gallery, you don’t quite recognize them. I’d 
like to introduce Kaurie May. Kaurie lived across the street 
from our family right from kindergarten to grade 12; in fact I 
had the pleasure of teaching him in grade 7 and 8. Now I know 
he’s an accountant. I can’t say I taught him everything in math, 
but he was a great kid, played a lot of sports, and it was great. 
 
His brother was here a couple of years ago with the medical 
students and doing lobbying for that. I think his practice is in 
Toronto now. And his mom and dad, Gord and Leanne, are just 
great, stand-up folks. So I’d ask everyone to welcome Kaurie 
May to his legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, 
I’d like to introduce a very special guest today. Sitting in the 
west gallery are a group of very dedicated home-based 
educators from four Saskatchewan constituencies. And I’m 
going to introduce mine that come from Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
We have Lydia Nieminen and her children Ethan, Summerlee, 
and Jacob. And we have Darcy Miller and her children, 
Simeret, Eyob, and Bethlehem. Guys, give us a wave. Great, 
thanks. And we wish all members to welcome Lydia, Darcy, 
and their families to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 
member from Melville-Saltcoats in welcoming the group of 
home-based educators that are in the west gallery. 
 
I have two families here, Karen Reinheimer and her son, Klark. 
If they could give us a wave. And Fred and Amanda 
Skorobohach — hopefully I got the name right — and their 
children, Isabella, Thomas, Napoleon, and Nicolas. And I’d ask 
all members to welcome them to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to follow the other two members. And in the west 
gallery, I’d like to introduce and welcome Marcus and Lisa 
Breitkreuz from my constituency of Canora-Pelly and their 
children, Emily, Cole, Ava, and Lily. If I could get everybody 
to wave over there, I’d like to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to you and 
through you, I too would like to welcome some guests from my 
constituency. In the west gallery, a home school group, Dale 
and Charlotte Shwanke and their children, Madeline, Blake, 

Robyn, and Ephram. Please give us a wave, and welcome to 
your legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you, I have a guest that is sitting in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, that I’d like to introduce. It’s Joy 
Schewaga. Joy, can you give us a wave up there? Joy is my CA 
[constituency assistant]. She’s one of the hardest working CAs 
out there. She was here yesterday for the budget. I mean, I 
know everybody will say that, but mine actually is the 
hardest-working CA . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, 
considering what she has to deal with, Mr. Speaker.  
 
But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, Joy has been a friend of 
mine for 20 years, and a good friend. She’s a hockey mom and 
an athletic mom, and she travels all around the province with 
her kids, and to hockey and to all kinds of athletics. And they’re 
on the go every weekend as well. And, Mr. Speaker, I was so 
glad that she could make it down here for budget day yesterday, 
and to stay over, and take her out for dinner last night, and that 
she could come here, into the House here today, Mr. Speaker. 
So I’d like everyone to join me in welcoming Joy to her 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I was a little bit remiss. Kristy Shaw, my CA, 
is also in the gallery. She’s a graduate of Ignite as well. 
 
And the Minister of CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan], you talked about which CA actually had to 
work a little harder. I would put all your attention towards 
having to keep me organized as exhibit one. Welcome, Kristy. 
 
Presenting . . . Oh, sorry. One more? I recognize the member 
from Kindersley . . . [inaudible interjection]. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Francis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You continue to keep 
me on my toes. Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Claydon, 
Frontier, and Eastend, Saskatchewan. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 
support of mental health and addictions services in the North. 
Northern Saskatchewan has some of the highest suicide rates in 



3736 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2018 

the country. The Children’s Advocate has put out a report 
stating the lack of services in the North. The suicide rate is six 
times higher for First Nations boys than for non-First Nations 
boys between the ages of 10 and 19, and 26 times higher for 
First Nations girls than non-First Nations girls. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to treat northern Saskatchewan 
residents with respect and dignity and immediately invest 
in more mental health and wellness programs and facilities 
in the North. 

 
It is signed by many good people of this province; the cities of 
Prince Albert, Regina, Saskatoon, and La Ronge. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition regarding funding to our children’s classrooms. Those 
who have signed this petition wish to draw our attention to a 
few items. One is the fact that last year’s budget cut $54 million 
for every student for classrooms across this province, despite 
the fact that this government took in $67 million in additional 
funding through education property tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition are well aware 
that backfilling 30 million of that 54 million does not go near 
far enough, and that those cuts continue to hurt children and 
programming throughout the province, in schools in every 
corner of this province. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the government to reverse all of the senseless cuts to our 
children’s classrooms and stop making families, teachers, 
and everyone who works to support our education system 
pay the price for the Sask Party’s mismanagement, scandal, 
and waste. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
Saskatoon and Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. And 
the undersigned residents of Saskatchewan want to bring to our 
attention the following: that Saskatchewan’s outdated election 
Act allows corporations, unions, and individuals, even those 
outside the province, to make unlimited donations to our 
province’s political parties. 
 
And we know that over the past 10 years, the Saskatchewan 
Party has received $12.61 million in corporate donations; and of 
that, $2.87 million come from companies outside this province 
of Saskatchewan. And we know that Saskatchewan politics 
should belong to Saskatchewan people. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 

Party to overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign finance laws, 
to end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 
from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 
on individual donations. 

 
And the people signing this petition today come from the city of 
Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
today to present a petition for a second bridge for Prince Albert. 
The undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan 
wish to bring these following points to your attention, Mr. 
Speaker: that the Diefenbaker bridge in Prince Albert is the 
primary link that connects the southern part of the province to 
the North, and that the need for a second bridge for Prince 
Albert has never been clearer than it is today. 
 
Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution; that the Saskatchewan Party government 
refuses to stand up for Prince Albert and this critical 
infrastructure issue; and that local municipal governments have 
limited resources and require a second bridge to be funded 
through federal and provincial governments and not a P3 
[public-private partnership] model. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition come from the 
community of Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical workplace supports for 
survivors of domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has 
the dubious distinction of having the highest rates of intimate 
partner violence amongst all of the provinces in Canada. And 
we all know that Saskatchewan must do much more and should 
be doing everything they can to protect survivors of domestic 
violence. For many who experience interpersonal violence, Mr. 
Speaker, the violence follows them to their workplace, so we 
should do all that we can to ensure that our workplaces are a 
safe space and are protected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those who sign this petition are calling for five 
paid days’ leave and up to 17 weeks of unpaid leave be made 
available to workers who are survivors of intimate partner 
violence, and also that critical workplace supports be made 
available to survivors of domestic violence if they are living 
with post-traumatic stress disorder as a result of that domestic 



April 11, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3737 

violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the provisions we’re calling for in the 
private member’s Bill No. 609. Mr. Speaker, this is the fourth 
time we’ve put forward a bill asking for these provisions. It’s 
time for the Sask Party to do the right thing and vote in favour 
of that private member’s bill and put that into law. I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to pass legislation to ensure 
critical supports in the workplace, including reasonable 
accommodation and paid and unpaid leave for survivors of 
domestic violence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition today come 
from McLean and Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to stand in my place today to present a petition around 
Orkambi. Whereas Orkambi is the first drug to treat the basic 
defect in the largest population of Canadians with cystic 
fibrosis, Mr. Speaker, it could slow disease progression 
allowing patients to live longer, healthier lives. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

They respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan urge the Ministry of Health to negotiate a 
fair price for Orkambi and to make it available to the 
Saskatchewan drug plan for those who meet the conditions 
set by Health Canada and the clinical criteria established 
by the Canadian CF clinicians. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition . . . 
The number of people that have signed this petition are very 
impressive. And, Mr. Speaker, as well they also have an online 
petition on which they are collecting names. And this particular 
page that I’m presenting today on Orkambi, or people that have 
signed this particular page, are primarily from Maidstone, 
Lloydminster. And I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

International Day of Pink 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
marks the International Day of Pink, a day where communities 
across the country — across the world — can unite in 
celebrating diversity and raising awareness to stop homophobia, 
transphobia, transmisogyny, and all forms of bullying. It’s a day 
to say that we will not tolerate violence in our communities. 
Most importantly, Mr. Speaker, the Day of Pink is a day for 
expressing kindness, compassion, and courage. Each year on 
the second Wednesday of April, millions of people wear pink 
and take a stand. The Day of Pink is a symbol, a spark that 
empowers and inspires youth across Canada to create amazing 
social change. 
 

Mr. Speaker, bullying is a complex issue, and youth are 
demanding that we help to provide solutions. We must listen to 
the youth leaders in our communities and the solutions they are 
offering. We must adequately fund anti-bullying workshops and 
programs for youth and adults. All of us must take the time to 
educate ourselves about the issues that LGBTQ [lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, transgender, queer and/or questioning] youth are 
facing in our communities. Most of all, Mr. Speaker, we must 
show compassion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, anyone can bully. Anyone can be victimized by 
bullying. But together we can stop it. Mr. Speaker, I ask that my 
fellow members of the House join with me in standing up for 
our youth and come together in addressing bullying and 
discrimination in Saskatchewan on today’s Day of Pink and 
every day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 
 

Canadian Cancer Society Daffodil Campaign 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April is Cancer 
Awareness Month, also known as Daffodil Month. The daffodil 
is a symbol of strength and courage in the fight against cancer. 
Mr. Speaker, we are all very aware of how cancer can affect a 
family and a community. Though this disease may cast a dark 
shadow on so many hearts, it’s fundraisers like the daffodil 
campaign that can shine a light during tough times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the 61st Daffodil Month campaign which is 
run by the Canadian Cancer Society. The daffodil campaign 
involves hundreds of Saskatchewan volunteers who sell freshly 
cut daffodils and lapel pins. It is very encouraging to see so 
many businesses and families across Saskatchewan buying 
flowers and showing their support by wearing these pins. 
Donations raised by the campaign go towards life-saving 
research and information support services, helping people living 
with cancer, and their families. 
 
The Canadian Cancer Society’s vision is to create a world 
where no Canadian fears cancer. Without the support of the 
dedicated volunteers and research teams, life-changing 
campaigns like this would not be possible, so we thank them for 
their hard work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage and challenge members in this 
Assembly to get involved, whether it be buying flowers, 
wearing a daffodil pin, or scheduling a screening. I ask all 
members to join me in wishing the Canadian Cancer Society 
well on their 61st annual daffodil campaign. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Asbestos Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week marked Asbestos Awareness Week. Asbestos is the 
leading cause of workplace deaths in Canada. It is estimated 
that 152,000 workers are currently exposed to asbestos, and 
unfortunately this number is likely much higher. 
 



3738 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2018 

[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been three years since Howard’s law was 
passed, and we are proud that both sides of the aisle came 
together for the creation of such an important bill. Howard’s 
law is a mandatory registry of public buildings. Before 
Howard’s law came to be, many public buildings did not have 
any records of whether asbestos existed or not. When 
completed, this registry will be the first of its kind in Canada 
and save many Saskatchewan lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would like to take this time to recognize 
Howard Willems, whom this law was brought on behalf of. He 
was a Saskatoon man who passed away from a rare form of 
cancer caused by inhaling asbestos fibres. Mr. Speaker, we 
would also like to recognize Jesse Todd who continued to fight 
for Howard’s law to be passed. Jesse is an activist for workers’ 
safety. In 2016 he was the Chair for the Saskatchewan Asbestos 
Disease Awareness Organization which was started by Howard 
Willems and Bob Sass. Without such dedicated activists like 
Jesse, this law may not exist today. 
 
In honour of Howard’s memory and Jesse’s amazing advocacy, 
we urge the government to complete the registry. I call on all 
members to remain vigilant in the protection of Saskatchewan 
workers and families. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rochdale. 
 

International Day of Pink 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
April 11th marks the International Day of Pink where people 
from across the country and the world come together to 
celebrate diversity while bringing awareness to bullying, 
homophobia, and transphobia. 
 
This movement began in 2007 in Nova Scotia where two 
students intervened as a gay student was being bullied for 
wearing a pink shirt. The students, wanting to do more to 
prevent this kind of bullying, purchased pink shirts. And a few 
days later, in an incredible show of solidarity, the entire school 
arrived in these pink shirts. 
 
This inspirational act launched a global campaign and today 
communities, schools, organizations within our province are 
wearing pink today to show their support for this important 
cause. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to host over 200 Girl Guides today 
who will be attending the Legislative Assembly Building, and 
it’s wonderful for them to be able to come here and celebrate. 
The event will be held here this evening, as I said. The goal of 
the Pink Day is to emphasize the role these young girls can play 
in stopping bullying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage everyone in this Assembly to take a 
lesson from those inspiring young girls and see what roles we 
can all play in preventing bullying as we continue to make 
Saskatchewan a safe and welcoming place for everyone. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Constituent Recognized for Canola Production 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 
again Saskatchewan agriculture producers have shown 
exceptional results in competition in Western Canada. My 
constituent, AWD Farms Ltd., was recently awarded the 
Dupont Pioneer Yield Hero Award for canola production at an 
astounding 98.2 bushels per acre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this competition is open to farmers from Western 
Canada and there are stringent rules around the application 
process, including yield weighing, minimum swath 
requirements, moisture content, and specifically that irrigated 
acres do not qualify. 
 
Constituent Doug Hoffus reported that the qualifying sample 
was taken from a 600-acre area near the Horsehide wildlife 
management area, approximately 12 miles north of Chelan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, AWD Farms is another example of extraordinary 
agricultural achievement here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Again we have an illustration of sustainable agriculture 
practices that put our farmers squarely in the lead in global 
production. With innovative and exceptional producers such as 
AWD, it’s easy to understand why our agriculture continues to 
power our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of everyone in this Assembly, I want to 
congratulate AWD Farms for all their success, and 
acknowledge all of our exceptional agriculture producers. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Pasquia Snow Goers Volunteer Time to Maintain Trails 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, the Pasquia Snow Goers is a 
snowmobile club in northeast Saskatchewan operated by 
volunteers in Carrot River, Arborfield, and Zenon Park. These 
volunteers work together to provide over 260 kilometres of 
excellent groomed and signed trails. These trails meander from 
Hudson Bay through the provincial forest in the Pasquia Hills, 
across the farm lands to Nipawin, and continue up to the 
Lakeland areas. The club also provides warm up shelters 
supplied with split wood, outhouses, and firepits for a warm up 
or a quick lunch stop on your ride. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the club was the provincial winner for the 
Sledtown Showdown, a contest voted on by sled riders from all 
over Canada. They also defeated Manitoba in the 
interprovincial contest, moving on to a Western Canadian final 
against McBride, BC [British Columbia], where we lost by a 
mere 21 votes. Mr. Speaker, we was robbed. 
 
My CA, Cindy Warner, is a member of the club, and her family 
won the Canadian Snowmobile Family of the Year, an award 
received for the hours of volunteer work clearing trails, putting 
up signs, hauling wood, and whatever else needed to be done. 
The club also received the Diamonds in the Snow which is 
presented to young people under the age of 16 who volunteer 



April 11, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3739 

their time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are very fortunate to have so many volunteers 
willing to donate their time. On behalf of this Assembly, I’d 
like to congratulate the Pasquia Snow Goers for their excellent 
trails and thank the volunteers who work hard to provide this 
service. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Anniversary of the Battle of Vimy Ridge 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Around the world 
many gathered to honour those who served in the Battle of 
Vimy Ridge on April 9th. One hundred and one years ago, 
divisions of the Canadian corps, many of whom had never met, 
who had come from every corner of our country, took to the 
battlefields as one. 
 
What was Canada’s identity before that day, Mr. Speaker? We 
had a confederation. There was a national way. Saskatchewan 
was a growing province, but to most of the world Canada was 
just seen as a British extension. After that day, Mr. Speaker, the 
world saw our country differently. Those young men in the 
trenches took the ridge, something brave British and French 
men had tried to do. Our boys did it. This week we’ve seen the 
hurt the loss of 15 young lives can do to a community, a 
province, a nation. Can we even imagine 10,000? 
 
As more recent losses remind us to sign an organ donor card, to 
hold our loved ones tighter, to be kinder to one another, let the 
lessons of the older losses stay with us too — that some have 
sacrificed everything willingly for our freedoms; that the lives 
we all enjoy today are built on a foundation of courage, honour, 
and sacred blood. Let us be worthy of their sacrifice. Lest we 
forget. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Provincial Budget and Government’s  
Fiscal Management 

 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s the first day after a 
new budget was introduced, and it’s important for us to start by 
giving credit where credit is due. Never let us be the sort of 
place where we would knock a good decision simply because 
it’s another party that has made it. 
 
So I want to acknowledge some good decisions in yesterday’s 
budget, one of which was the introduction of full coverage for 
HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] medications. It’s 
something that’s been advocated for by the community and by 
our members for several years, and we’re happy to see that put 
in place. That will help treat people and prevent new cases. 
 
We also were happy to see something that’s been advocated for 
as well, is funding for autism, and to see this government take a 
step towards greater treatment, greater support for mental 
health. These are all positive things. 
 
And you know, we’re very happy to have ideas we’ve been 

pushing be accepted and adopted by the folks on the other side. 
And hey, we’ve got a few more. If you want to hear any more 
ideas, we’d be happy to talk about it.  
 
And I guess my question for the Premier is, we’ve got some 
ideas on how to improve the economy, how to improve the 
quality of people’s lives. Are there any other ideas that you’ve 
seen from us that you’d like to implement, or would you like to 
sit down and chat a bit about what we could do together? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and I appreciate the member opposite’s offer, Mr. Speaker. And 
we have listened, in some ways, to the members opposite and, 
just as importantly, to all the people of the province in 
Saskatchewan as we formulated this budget that was released 
yesterday by this Minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker, the MLA 
for Humboldt. And we’re pleased to say that this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, continues on our three-year plan to balance, and this 
budget this year released yesterday keeps us on track, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while staying on track to that plan to balance, we 
are able to, as the member opposite, as the Leader of the 
Opposition indicated, we’re able to invest in people, invest in 
people across the province of Saskatchewan — whether that be, 
Mr. Speaker, in fully covering HIV drugs; whether that be 
investing in supports for autism here in the province of 
Saskatchewan; whether that be investing in our 
community-based organizations, with a lift to those that are 
providing services to our disability community, Mr. Speaker, as 
well as the family services — all the while carrying on with the 
tremendous infrastructure investment that we have across the 
province of Saskatchewan in hospitals, in highways, Mr. 
Speaker, and schools. 
 
So we thank the members opposite for their input in the 
formulation of this budget, Mr. Speaker, but we thank the 
people of Saskatchewan for their input as well, Mr. Speaker, as 
we remain on track on their behalf to balance next year. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, budgets are 
a chance for a government to really express its vision, the way 
that it’s going to tackle the greatest challenges that are facing a 
province. What I see in this budget, Mr. Speaker, are a number 
of missed opportunities. 
 
The greatest challenges that we’re facing — challenges of 
increasing unemployment, more and more people looking for 
work; the challenges of a changing climate that’s affecting 
communities throughout the province; the challenge of a 
persistent and drastic inequity between indigenous and 
non-indigenous people in this province, the challenge of closing 
that gap — not only was this budget silent on those challenges, 
Mr. Speaker, we actually saw movement backwards. 
 
We saw no new initiatives. We also saw a cut to the climate 
change branch of 18 per cent. That’s an 80 per cent cut since 
2012. We saw a cut to First Nations and Métis programming, 
including programming for advanced education. We saw cuts to 



3740 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2018 

programs in labour services that would help people get back to 
work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This status quo budget fails to address, fails to acknowledge the 
most pressing challenges of our province, of our generation. 
Mr. Speaker, does this Premier agree that we need to address 
those challenges of unemployment, of closing the gap, of 
climate change? And when will we see meaningful action rather 
than the steps backward that we’ve seen in this budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, the focus of this government 
over the last decade has been one of growth, Mr. Speaker, 
growth of our economy, growth of our exports, growth of the 
jobs in communities across this province, whether they be in 
Frontier, Mr. Speaker or St. Brieux, Saskatchewan or 
Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Regina. Mr. Speaker, that has been the 
focus so that we can attract families to live here from all around 
the world. Mr. Speaker, that has been shown and is reflective in 
communities that I had the opportunity to visit, big and small, 
across the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But more important than any of that, this growth agenda and 
this strong economy that we have made every effort to continue, 
Mr. Speaker, and will make every effort into the future, Mr. 
Speaker, is important to the people of the province. It’s not just 
so that we can attract people from all around the world, Mr. 
Speaker, to join our communities and grow our population, Mr. 
Speaker, but to give that next generation every opportunity to 
stay in this province and choose a career in one of the great 
communities in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Budgets, they tell a 
story. But the story of this budget appears to be no story at all. 
We see nothing in the way of imagination. We see no vision. 
We see no plan. Mr. Speaker, we all agree that we want the 
people of Saskatchewan to have what they need to stay healthy. 
We want fewer people in poverty, fewer people in our jails, 
fewer people in our hospitals. We want the people of 
Saskatchewan to have the chance to thrive. In order to get there, 
we have to be proactive to make that happen. 
 
But instead we see a reactive budget, Mr. Speaker. We see an 
increase in health spending because more people are sick, 
increase in spending in corrections because more people are 
being put in jail, increased spending in social services because 
more people are living in poverty. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
short-sighted budget. There is no long-term plan to get 
Saskatchewan where we all want us to be. 
 
And we heard this morning at the Prayer Breakfast, the speaker 
said, when’s the best time to plant a tree? He said, it’s 30 years 
ago. When’s the second-best time to plant a tree? That’s right 
now. Mr. Speaker, will this government show that they 
understand the need to think long term, that they will show they 
have a vision for the future, or will we continue to see the 
downstream costs rise year after year? 
 
[14:15] 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, as the Leader of the 
Opposition referenced in his first question, $700,000 invested, 
Mr. Speaker, in HIV medication to ensure those medications are 
100 per cent covered, Mr. Speaker. Tree planted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we invested in autism spectrum disorder in this 
budget that was released yesterday. Mr. Speaker, $2.8 million 
on behalf of the children in the province of Saskatchewan that 
are struggling with autism, Mr. Speaker. Tree planted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $30 million directly into our classrooms and 
classrooms across this province to ensure that the next 
generation has the supports and every opportunity to succeed, 
Mr. Speaker. Tree planted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $10 million directly into our community-based 
organizations on the front lines of servicing people in the 
province of Saskatchewan and in family services in the 
disability community, Mr. Speaker. Tree planted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the way of the economy, Mr. Speaker, and 
enhancing the opportunities in the economic fortunes of the 
province of Saskatchewan, this province under this government 
will never have a carbon tax on the industries and the people 
and the families in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Tree planted. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, no shortage of irony there. This 
government actually cut the reforestation budget to zero in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker. Now, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party says 
that they’re on track, but we found out that Saskatchewan 
people are actually on a holding pattern on a railway siding. 
 
Let’s look at this track they really are on. Our debt is set to 
increase to over $20 billion. That’s on track to triple since 2008. 
We had the highest — the highest, Mr. Speaker — net debt per 
capita this province has ever seen. Under the Sask Party’s plan, 
we’ll be spending $51 million more on debt charges alone. 
That’s a total of $655 million on debt. That’s money that should 
be going to health care, to education, supports for the 
vulnerable, instead of pouring it into things like the GTH’s 
[Global Transportation Hub] growing debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know what? The budget didn’t really give people 
much hope for the future when we have this debt continuously 
piling on. To the minister: what is the plan to get Saskatchewan 
out of this mess? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting how the 
members opposite always portray that we can’t have debt, but 
we need more spending. We can’t have taxes, but we need more 
revenue. Like nothing they say makes any sense, Mr. Speaker. 
The math just simply doesn’t add up. 
 
Very little of the debt, Mr. Speaker, is actually on what we call 
the credit card debt, or the operating funding debt, Mr. Speaker. 
That debt is still down from when we became government and 



April 11, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3741 

the NDP [New Democratic Party] left.  
 
We do have a debt, higher quite frankly, in our Crown 
corporations, its capital funding. Because we have a growing 
population, we need more hook-ups within our utilities, Mr. 
Speaker. Those hook-ups cost money. We had aging 
infrastructure that we inherited, Mr. Speaker. To replace that 
infrastructure costs money. Mr. Speaker, we built roads in this 
province like we’ve never seen before . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I’m having a tough time hearing the answer, 
if you could come to order. Thanks. I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
building hospitals. We’re building schools, not shutting them 
down. Mr. Speaker, capital costs, how are those . . . We know, 
and that member opposite should know, that we invest sinking 
funds to make the future payments on capital borrowing. And 
she should know that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the fact that there are sinking 
funds doesn’t mean that the net debt isn’t growing by over 110 
per cent since . . . Sorry, I’ll try that again. The net debt of 
Saskatchewan will have increased by over 110 per cent since 
2007 by the end of this year. 
 
So I want to ask the minister this: in what world would it be 
okay to have record debt amounts, especially when it comes to 
years after years of record revenues? Mr. Speaker, how is it 
okay to not have a plan to deal with it, not have a plan to create 
jobs or a plan to build prosperity for the future or maybe even a 
plan to grow the economy? In this budget, the people of the 
province were left with nothing but this debt, Mr. Speaker. So 
to the minister: how can you try to paint such a rosy picture and 
pretend nothing is wrong when our debt is reaching this level? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the plan is to grow the 
economy. And so the economy is greater than it’s ever been. 
Debt to GDP [gross domestic product] in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, is the third lowest in our entire country, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re neck to neck with British Columbia, and Alberta’s is a 
little lower. But every other province has a higher, a much 
higher debt-to-GDP ratio than Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This 
is manageable debt, Mr. Speaker. Also it was never under the 
NDP where we had AAA credit rating, and we do now. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Saskatchewan people were expecting so much 
better from this Premier when it comes to education. The Sask 
Party had the opportunity to undo the damage that they caused 
by cutting millions to our children’s classrooms, but they chose 
not to. Yesterday’s $30 million offering doesn’t come close to 

replacing the $54 million that they cut from our classrooms just 
last year, and this despite the fact that by the end of this year 
we’ll see thousands of additional students in our schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not the budget that boards hoped for, and 
this certainly is not the budget that our children deserve. Why 
didn’t the Sask Party choose to invest in our future and fully 
fund our children’s classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, contrary to what the 
member has said, Mr. Speaker, I met with school board trustees 
yesterday morning, and they were happy with our budget. Mr. 
Speaker, $30 million commitment — promise made, Mr. 
Speaker, promise kept. And those resources will go to the 
classroom, Mr. Speaker. Those are resources to invest in the 
classroom to make sure that we’re providing the right quality 
education for children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’re going to continue to have conversations with 
trustees. We’re going to continue to have conversations with 
teachers and with parents, Mr. Speaker, because we want to 
make sure that we’re making the right investments in the 
classrooms to prepare our children for the future, the future of 
this province, which we’re going to rely on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m pleased with the commitment that the Premier has made, 
Mr. Speaker. We stood together in the rotunda, Mr. Speaker, 
and made this promise. And it’s in the budget, Mr. Speaker, and 
school boards are pleased with it, Mr. Speaker. But we’re going 
to continue to have an ongoing conversation, a renewed 
dialogue with teachers, Mr. Speaker, with school board trustees, 
and with parents to make sure that we are meeting the needs of 
children in the classroom. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, not as bad as last year is a pretty 
low bar, and frankly I’d expect more from . . . [inaudible]. The 
math is easy; negative 54 plus 30 does not equal zero. Teachers 
and parents are still being forced to pick up the pieces from last 
year’s cuts, and the Sask Party’s failure to make investment in 
education a real priority is nothing but more of the same. 
 
There will be nearly 5,000 additional students in our schools 
over 2016-17 levels, yet funding from the Sask Party has been 
cut by 24 million over ’16-17 levels. How on earth can the Sask 
Party sit there and clap for themselves over this failure to invest 
in our children’s future? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, we have made an 
investment, a $30 million investment in the classrooms around 
this province, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to continue to 
have conversations with our stakeholders, with our partners in 
education, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that we are meeting the 
needs of children in the classroom. That’s going to be an 
ongoing dialogue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after last year’s budget, school divisions went out 



3742 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2018 

and found some great efficiencies within their operations . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, well if they’d like to 
have the answer, I’m happy to give it, Mr. Speaker. But looking 
for efficiencies within government, whether it’s in government 
or whether it’s in school boards, is an important part of 
governance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this $30 million represents a significant investment, a 
significant commitment by this government that we understand 
that it’s important to invest in the classrooms of these 
communities, Mr. Speaker, around this province. And we’ll 
continue to do that, and we’ll continue to have conversations to 
make sure we’re meeting the needs of children in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Saskatchewan Employment Numbers 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, if someone picks my pocket and 
gives me back half, am I expected to say thank you? According 
to this month’s Stats Canada job figures, Saskatchewan has the 
slowest rate of job growth in our country, outside of 
Newfoundland and Labrador. We also have the lowest 
minimum wage in the country. People are looking at this 
government to invest in fostering good jobs in a sustainable 
economy, yet this year’s Sask Party budget cuts $2.9 million 
from the programs that are designed to get people back to work.  
 
Mr. Speaker, what does the minister have to say to people who 
are struggling to find work today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Export. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I think the member opposite looked at a different jobs 
report than the one that was issued by Statistics Canada last 
Friday. That jobs report showed that we have, and continue to 
have, one of the lowest unemployment rates in Canada. It 
showed that our job growth over the course of the last month 
was the quickest in Canada, Mr. Speaker: 4,300 jobs created 
over the last month, over 1,500 jobs created year over year. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s consistent with our record on job 
creation over the course of the last decade of growth, over 
60,000 jobs created in this province over that period of time. 
Their record over the previous 10 years was the worst rate of 
job creation record in the country. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn’t comment, this is 
a fundamentally unserious opposition. They stand up, in 
question after question they demand more spending, and then 
they castigate the government over debt. Meanwhile the Leader 
of the Opposition runs on a $2.5 billion spending pledge year 
over year, Mr. Speaker. And then they put out a tweet yesterday 
saying, “Spending more on social services, corrections, 
policing, justice and health care does not represent an 
investment.” Mr. Speaker, they need to get their act together. 
They’re an unserious opposition. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, it looks like the minister across 
only uses year-to-year job numbers when it suits him. 
Saskatchewan’s additional 900 jobs compared to last year, most 
of them part-time jobs, were nowhere near the 32,000 jobs in 
British Columbia or the 46,600 jobs in Alberta. And let’s 
remind the member seeking to spin our job numbers that 
Saskatchewan lost 7,800 jobs in February, compared . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll remind the 
member seeking to spin our job numbers that Saskatchewan lost 
7,800 jobs in February, compared to 2017. Mr. Speaker, more 
people are leaving the province today than there were 10 years 
ago. Just last week I heard an Alberta construction company 
advertising the work in their province on a Saskatoon radio 
station. 
 
What does this budget have to offer to people who are giving up 
on finding a good job in Saskatchewan and packing their bags 
to head west? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, it’s almost like the NDP 
have completely forgotten their record in government. This is 
the problem that they have when they talk about the economy. 
Their record was the worst in the country on job growth, on 
population growth, on both of which, Mr. Speaker, there were 
none when they were in government. The population decreased 
by 20,000 people in their last decade in office. Over the course 
of the last decade, our decade of growth, our population in this 
province has increased by 160,000 people, a rate of growth we 
have not seen in nearly 80 years, Mr. Speaker. That’s the record 
on this side of the House. 
 
As far as job creation, we’ve created over 60,000 jobs. The 
economy of this province has created over 60,000 jobs over the 
last decade. Over the last month there were over 4,000 jobs 
created in this province, Mr. Speaker. There were over 1,200 
jobs created over the course of the last year in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. We had the fastest rate of job growth in the entire 
country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said before, this is an opposition that is 
fundamentally unserious. This is an opposition that has no 
credibility on the economy. This is an opposition that needs to 
look in the mirror and remember what their record was. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Changes to Rental Housing Supplement 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, if we could balance the 
budget on the pompous rhetoric of that minister, we’d be in 
pretty good shape here. 
 
This budget continues to hit and hurt the most vulnerable in our 
province. The choice to cut the rental supplement will only hurt 
Saskatchewan people and families that are already struggling. 



April 11, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3743 

These are vulnerable families with children and people living 
with disabilities that are living on the tightest of margins. This 
is the last place that the Sask Party should be looking to balance 
the books. It’s indecent, it lacks common sense, and it defies . . . 
It lacks basic compassion. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen underhanded manoeuvres like this 
before. Will this government simply do the right thing and scrap 
this attack on the most vulnerable today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I want 
to correct the record right off the bat. Nobody that is on our 
programs right now within social assistance will be affected by 
this. This is a continuing program. Our Saskatchewan rental 
housing . . . Well if they’re interested in hearing the answer, I’ll 
give them the answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What it is, Mr. Speaker, is anybody that is coming onto our 
program new as of July 1st, because of certain market 
indicators, Mr. Speaker . . . We have the highest vacancy rate in 
our nation, Mr. Speaker. We also have the lowest rent in 
average in our two major cities, in Saskatoon and Regina, in 
Western Canada, Mr. Speaker. That, combined with a federal 
program that’s coming on board, Mr. Speaker, we understand 
that this is going to have some impact on some of our clients, 
Mr. Speaker, but we’re prepared to work with those clients to 
be able to . . . [inaudible]. 
 
On top of that, Mr. Speaker, we also have Sask Housing 
Corporation which has a 12 per cent vacancy rate. There is 740 
units in Saskatoon and in Regina combined, Mr. Speaker, that 
are not being utilized, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that’s a minister that’s 
completely out of touch with the reality facing low-wage 
workers, people all across Saskatchewan. The vacancy might be 
up, but the rates that people are paying for rental across this 
province have not come down, and that minister should know 
better. 
 
You know, this is a Sask Party government that’s actually 
touted an increase to spending for social services in this budget, 
and they pretend that that means that they’re listening to the 
most vulnerable. But, Mr. Speaker, the reality is the dollars that 
are being added to income assistance don’t mean that those that 
need support are actually getting more. It means that more 
people are seeking support, that more and more people are 
going onto assistance. In fact, the insufficient rate has been 
frozen for many years. And now housing dollars are being 
pulled away, and that’s on top of the clawback of basic food 
budgets of last year, Mr. Speaker.  
 
How can this government boast and be proud of the fact that we 
continue to see more and more people living in poverty and 
needing assistance, instead of taking action to address poverty 
and create opportunity? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I actually 
received a report a couple of weeks ago that says the average 
rent in Saskatchewan and our two major cities of Saskatoon and 
Regina is down $150 year over year, Mr. Speaker. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, we have actually in the last six months — and I don’t 
know if the member opposite has received this information — 
but in the last six months we have less people on our social 
assistance program. 
 
Usually, Mr. Speaker, we have an uptick over the winter within 
our social assistance programs, but in the last six months we’ve 
actually seen a down trend in our numbers, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think this has to do directly with, the Minister of Trade was 
talking about, is our economy is getting . . . [inaudible]. We are 
having less and less people across our province on social 
assistance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as far as the rent side of things, Mr. Speaker, we’re very 
happy to work with any clients on an ongoing basis. We have 
left a window of opportunity for anybody that wants to apply 
for the Sask rental housing supplement. They have until the end 
of the month in June to be able to do that. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Funding for Municipalities 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s municipal 
leaders are breathing a sigh of relief, not because this lacklustre 
budget is good for them, it just isn’t as bad as last year. Last 
year’s devastating budget and subsequent Sask Party 
walk-backs forced municipalities to scramble and redo their 
budgets. And this year, despite calls from SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] for their fair 
share of the expanded PST [provincial sales tax] revenues, the 
minister announced revenue sharing with hometowns will be 
frozen at its lowest level in years. 
 
How is it fair to make cities and towns pay more but get less 
than what they’re owed? Will the minister assure municipalities 
will be getting their share of the expanded PST revenues 
moving forward? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly appreciate the 
question from the opposition, but we will probably not be 
taking a lot of advice from the opposition as to how we’re going 
to be moving forward in our revenue sharing. 
 
We’ve got a tremendous relationship with our stakeholders. At 
our stakeholder meetings yesterday, we had very good reports 
and very good response from the consultations and the actions 
that we’ve taken ahead of time, keeping everybody informed 
and everybody up to speed as to where we’re headed, what 
we’re looking at. We’re certainly going to be engaging with our 
stakeholders the minute we’re done our budget presentations 
here, and start working on what our new municipal 



3744 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2018 

revenue-sharing program may look like. 
 
We’ve had a lot of changes in the last 10 years. We’ve got a 
couple of new potash mines. We have a new bypass. We have 
new roads. We have new buildings. We have a lot of new . . . 
We have 160,000 new people living in the province. So we 
need to look at municipal revenue sharing. We will certainly be 
getting great input, we believe, from our stakeholders, and 
they’re going to present us their best-case scenarios and move 
forward. And we’re very much looking forward to working 
with them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, to say that last year’s budget 
was a shock to municipalities is an understatement. We don’t 
have to look any further than Regina city councillor and Sask 
Party candidate, Bob Hawkins, when he said, “This is a budget 
that comes like a thief in the night.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this year the government is forcing 
municipalities to do their dirty work, taking more out of 
Saskatchewan families’ pockets. This Sask Party budget did not 
fix the grants-in-lieu mess they created last year. Instead, they 
have just downloaded the problem to municipalities across the 
province who will now have no choice but to take more money 
from taxpayers. How can that minister justify this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, I believe we’ve finally got 
clarity on grants-in-lieu. It’s taken us awhile, but I think we’re 
to the point now where we’ve got all our stakeholders on the 
same page, understanding where we’re at with grants-in-lieu. It 
was a very, very difficult process to go through, but where 
we’re at is now we have the most fair, equitable, transparent 
process in place that all our stakeholders can use and measure 
as they move forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Supports for Northerners 
 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In what 
is now becoming a predictable, long-standing Sask Party 
tradition, yesterday’s budget had nothing for the North. When 
asked by the reporters about what specific measures were 
included in the budget to create jobs in northern communities, 
the minister acknowledged that there were no new incentives in 
the budget for the North, and pointed to education instead. 
 
Families in the North are really struggling. With more than 800 
jobs lost in the mining sector recently, they’re looking for the 
Saskatchewan Party government to take action. Business 
leaders in the Sask Chamber called for northern initiatives. But 
again, northern and Indigenous communities have been left 
twisting in the wind. 
 
Why is the Sask Party so intent on leaving the North behind? 
And why are they the only ones that can’t see that we need the 
North to be strong for Saskatchewan to be strong? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Mr. Speaker, like the member opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, we want to ensure that resource development 
continues to create opportunities and improve the economic 
success and well-being for First Nations and Métis 
communities. 
 
We’ve announced a mineral development strategy, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s a specific initiative. It’s an incentive which we believe 
will increase the amount of mineral exploration and lead to 
economic benefits for everybody in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s good news. This program will rebate a portion of 
incurred drilling costs up to 50,000 per company. And as the 
member opposite knows, mine development is important in 
providing valuable employment for northern residents. This 
program specifically targets exploration in the 
Creighton-Denare Beach area, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great start, 
good progress. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to question 194. 
 
The Speaker: — Table 194. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to question 195. 
 
The Speaker: — Order 195. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 196 to 210. 
 
The Speaker: — Table 196 to 210. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to question 211. 
 
The Speaker: — Order 211. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 



April 11, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3745 

again it’s always an honour to be able to rise in this Assembly 
and speak to government initiatives and the government agenda. 
And again today we’re speaking through this special order. For 
the next few days we get an opportunity to have a little bit of 
discussion about the budget that was tabled yesterday. 
 
Our leader said it tells a story and I really think that is what 
budgets do. They tell stories. They tell perhaps hopes and 
aspirations of a government. And of course the true story 
always gets found out in July when Public Accounts comes in 
and the real numbers are reflected. 
 
However we do tend to get more excited about the budget than 
we get excited about the Public Accounts and I don’t know if 
it’s the timing from March to July or, you know, by the time 
Public Accounts comes along the story’s already told, Mr. 
Speaker. But this was an aspirational story yesterday and I was 
able to make some comments yesterday about the lack of many 
things for the people of Saskatchewan’s budget. 
 
I talked about the fact that there’s no hope for families who are 
suffering from rate shock. The fees and rates and taxes have 
gone up and up and up, and people are struggling with that. 
There’s no hope there. No plan for the future. We have 
skyrocketing debt. Our net debt is approaching the $20 billion 
mark, Mr. Speaker. That’s alarming. And yet there appears to 
be no concern on the part of the government about our net debt. 
 
We talked about lack of inspiration. Other than a couple of 
small research and development incentives or value-added 
agricultural tax incentives, really for the creative industries and 
for creative people, people with excitement and passion and 
entrepreneurial passion, there isn’t a lot to be found in this 
budget. 
 
And finally we talked about the lack of leadership. And this is 
something I think that we don’t see. A government, the same 
old Sask Party government that’s been there for the last 10 
years, they aren’t full of any enthusiasm for the future, and 
they’re not showing the leadership that the next generation 
needs to take us forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today I just want to talk a little bit about some of the reaction 
of people, what people are saying about the budget. Not just the 
opposition, but of course people in the community and 
stakeholders that were here yesterday. There was hundreds of 
people here to listen to what the government had to say, and 
they had a lot to say about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to talk a little bit from some of the quotes that we found, 
what people are saying in the budget. The USSU [University of 
Saskatchewan Students’ Union] was here yesterday from my 
alma mater, the University of Saskatchewan, and the student 
executive representing the students were here and there was 
some interesting positions they are taking. And what they’re 
saying is . . . Here’s a quote from Deena Kapacila who’s the VP 
[vice-president] operations and finance for the USSU. She said: 
 

We put so many dollars into the economy at the University 
of Saskatchewan, we want to stay here, but that Sask 
Advantage . . . seems to be leaving students behind. At 
least I don’t see myself in the budget. I don’t see a future 
for me here. 

Those are harsh words, Mr. Speaker. And I was disappointed to 
see the Minister of Advanced Education’s response to this, 
because I think she really diminished the concerns that these 
students have had, indicating that she too had to work when she 
was in university. Mr. Speaker, that was then, but this is now. 
Tuition has gone up, cost of living gone up. The pressures on 
students . . .  
 
And I don’t think she graduated yesterday, Mr. Speaker. I know 
she graduated a few years ago. I graduated in ’79, and back then 
tuition was much, much lower than it is now. So the pressure on 
students these days, I think for the minister to sort of say, oh I 
hear you because I went through that . . . She didn’t go through 
that, Mr. Speaker. It’s a much more difficult time for students 
these days than when she was in university, Mr. Speaker. So I 
think she needs to perhaps think about responding differently 
when students are raising the concerns of 2018 and the 
pressures this government is putting on those students, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[14:45] 
 
We also heard from the Regina homelessness prevention 
strategy, a fellow named Blair Roberts who said, “There’s 
going to be people who are homeless because of this.” And this, 
of course, is the decision to remove the rental housing 
supplement as of July 1st for any new social services clients 
that come into the system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If they’d check, rents are not going down. My son is looking for 
rental arrangements right now, and he can barely find a 
one-bedroom apartment for less than $600, and that is not an 
ideal living situation where he’s chosen to live, Mr. Speaker. So 
for people . . . He’s got income. He’s working. But for people 
who are not able to find work, the removal of the rental 
supplement is going to cause great hardship, Mr. Speaker, and 
this government seems tone-deaf to that. 
 
Restaurants Canada: “We’re looking for more from this 
government.” They said, “. . . the Saskatchewan government 
has not done enough to offset the pain of last year’s 
anti-foodservice budget.” And he went on to say a lot there. 
 
Even the president of the University of Regina said, “It isn’t 
keeping up with our pace of enrolment, and our costs that we 
can’t control, like increase in electricity, water, all of those 
costs. So it means we will have to look at cuts for sure.” 
 
There’s others here from auto sales manager Rod Dorn from 
Anderson Auto Sales. He said, “(The government) is hitting the 
wrong people. Poor people buy the used cars — they’re the 
ones that can’t afford those new cars,” Mr. Speaker. So again 
this is a hit on people who have less disposable income and are 
struggling to get by. So where does this government cut? It’s a 
hit on low-income people. 
 
Mental Health Association, we know that Dave Nelson from the 
Canadian Mental Health Association was not happy yesterday. 
He is disappointed in this government’s lack of stepping up to 
the plate. We have a federal government that’s willing to throw 
in $9.2 million into mental health in this year’s budget. What 
does this government come up with? $2.2 million. And Dave 
Nelson is saying it has to be matched dollars. It simply is not 



3746 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2018 

keeping up with the demands on our system when it comes to 
helping people struggling with mental health issues. 
 
So those are some of the quotes that were in the paper today, 
Mr. Speaker. Also from the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation, there were some concerns about the $54 million cut, 
and the lack of getting back to that cut. 
 
One of the things I’m interested is, when the Minister of 
Education talks about having a respectful conversation with 
teachers and school boards, I’m trying to imagine these 
respectful conversations, because he talks about respectful 
conversations a lot. Now he’s a nice guy. He’s a guy that does 
have respectful conversations with people, and I think he’s a 
pleasant and quite affable man, Mr. Speaker. So, you know, I 
have no issues with that at all. But if all you’re doing is having 
a conversation and still cutting, what does that mean? Is that a 
respectful conversation, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And I’m really getting tired of the Minister of Education talking 
about respectful conversations when he can’t deliver, when he 
cannot give schools and our children, K to 12 [kindergarten to 
grade 12] classrooms, supports that they need. We know 
enrolments are going up. We heard our Education critic, our 
member from Regina Lakeview, eloquently talk about that in 
question period, if you could hear her, Mr. Speaker. But she 
really raised those concerns eloquently. And we get the minister 
stand up say, what we need is conversations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the time for conversations is over. Those 
conversations have been had. Schools have been very clear in 
their respectful conversations with the minister, what they need. 
And then the minister has replied, saying, you’re not getting 
that funding. So I think he needs to move on to a different tack 
because, as nice as he is, it’s not something I think that’s 
respectful anymore if you keep giving the wrong answers all the 
time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yes, I think those are most of the comments that I want to 
address. I know that many of my colleagues will have a number 
of things to say about the stakeholder reaction to this budget, to 
the story that the Sask Party’s trying to spin. 
 
I noticed yesterday in my comments there was some, you know, 
a room full of community leaders and stakeholders in this room. 
And even then, members opposite did not like it when I . . . You 
know, the hubris bubble is just getting bigger and bigger over 
there, Mr. Speaker. So every time you poke at it and let a little 
air out, you hear the noises coming out of that balloon over 
there. 
 
And I think when we have guests in our Assembly, as you said 
yourself, Mr. Speaker, even school . . . Oh, I hear more air 
coming out right now, Mr. Speaker. That’s something I think 
that we need to act a little more mature about. But you know, I 
know you’ve made a strong effort. I know I myself tend to erupt 
with comments from time to time. But I was quite surprised at 
the attitude of this government yesterday that anyone would 
dare to have the audacity to criticize them, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
shameful. 
 
But anyways, I don’t know, the member from Indian Head 
seems to be yelling about something. I’m not quite sure what 

he’s going on about . . . Here he goes again, Mr. Speaker. So 
I’m afraid I’m pricking the balloon a little bit more over there, 
and it’s not going over very well. 
 
There’s one aspect of this budget that is different from last year 
and different from . . . This is the fourth year now that we’ve 
had the summary financials. So we’ve heard lots in this 
Assembly about whether or not summary financial statements 
should be used. As you know that in 2013, in 2013 the . . . 
Perhaps the other members . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — There’s been a change in third-quarter 
reporting in the last quarter of the last year, and I think we have 
to really raise some serious questions about the government’s 
motives behind that. And this has to do with the pension accrual 
adjustments that now show up because we are now in the 
summary reporting world. So I’m going to break it down for 
everybody, Mr. Speaker, and hope I can set this out in a way 
that shows the jiggery-pokery that the government is up to in 
this year’s financial statement. 
 
So what we have is . . . Summary started in 2016. I’ll try to lay 
this out as best as I can. In 2016 the government said the deficit 
was 107 million. Mr. Speaker, the language that was used there 
when they were representing that, there was a little asterisk. So 
they reported they were going to have a surplus of 107 million 
but there was a little asterisk. And the asterisk, if you look, it 
says, “Before adjustment to account for pension costs on an 
accrual basis.” 
 
This is something that the auditor specifically asked them not to 
do, but they did it. And you have to ask yourself: why did they 
do that? I’ll give all the numbers globally at the end of this 
commentary, Mr. Speaker, but I just want to talk about what the 
government was saying in their first summary financial budget. 
And I’m going to quote page 43 of the ’15-16 budget: 
 

Pension expense in the budget is calculated using the same 
accounting and actuarial rules reported in the Public 
Accounts. The pension expense in the 2015-16 Estimates 
reflects cash requirements for the current year and an 
adjustment is made and reported in the 2015-16 Budget to 
account for government’s pension expense on an accrual 
basis. 
 

Now here’s the kicker, Mr. Speaker. Here’s what they said: 
 

Because of the volatile, long-term and non-cash nature of 
the pension accrual adjustment, it is reported separately so 
as to not influence annual spending and taxation policy. 

 
So they reported it separately. So when they said what the 
surplus would be, which would be 107 million, they forgot to 
mention — or they chose not to mention — that the adjustment 
for pension accrual was $820 million. If they had reported it 
then like they did yesterday, they would have had a deficit of 
$713.8 million. So in ’15-16 if they had reported the way they 
did yesterday, they would have shown a deficit of $713.8 



April 11, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3747 

million. Interesting, Mr. Speaker. But that was what they 
definitely said. 
 
And I actually had a conversation with the minister and the 
officials in committee about that, and I asked them, why are you 
doing that? Why aren’t you including the pension accrual 
adjustment in your surplus or deficit in your forecast? And this 
is what the official said. This is on page 86 of Crown and 
Central Agencies Committee, June 27th, 2016. And what he 
said is: 
 

The other thing that I’ll point out is that from a budget 
presentation on page 67, you’ll see that we report the 
deficit or surplus prior to our accounting for the pension 
liability change, and then subsequent we add or subtract 
the amount of the change in the pension liability that 
moves it to accrual accounting. That’s the top table. 

 
So it does show up, Mr. Speaker. This pension accrual 
adjustment is there every year, but it’s not there in the forecast 
for a surplus or deficit. He goes on to say, “Pension liabilities 
are a little bit unique in that they rely on a number of estimates 
that are made by actuaries.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, keep in mind this is their justification for not 
including it: 
 

One of the biggest factors, influences is the change in the 
interest rates. And as we discussed the other day, a 1 per 
cent drop in the interest rates costs the province 
approximately $1 billion in the liability change. Those 
payments are probably being paid out over the next 30 to 
35 years, and those fluctuations are going to change over 
the years quite dramatically, as they have in the past. 

 
So this is the quote I want people to pay special attention to 
when they’re looking at this. He says: 
 

The way the budget is presented currently, I think it gives a 
fairly clear picture of the cost of operating government on 
a more current basis. So the numbers that you see prior to 
the pension liability are the numbers that are going to be I 
guess closer to the amounts that we’re actually paying out 
in the coming year, whereas the pension liabilities are 
estimates of costs well into the future, in many cases 30 
years. 

 
So on June 27th, 2016, the government was defending their 
choice to report pension accrual adjustments separately. And as 
I said, Mr. Speaker, if they had reported it as the auditor had 
asked them to do in her 2016 report, they would have actually 
pegged a deficit of 713.8 million instead of a surplus of 107. 
 
The next years, ’17 and ’18, the pension accrual adjustment was 
much smaller. In 2017 it was $130 million and actually in 2018 
it was budgeted at $11.3 million. So you could see, Mr. 
Speaker, where the government probably didn’t have a case one 
way or another to include those numbers. It would have actually 
made a better situation for them because they were positive 
numbers and they were in a deficit world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But for the same reasons . . . and I’ll read out of the budget of 
2016-17. And in 2016-17, the government said this, and I quote 

from page 46: “Expense in the 2016-17 Budget is presented 
before the adjustment to account for pension costs on an accrual 
basis . . .” So again, they carried on that in ’16-17. 
 
In 2017-18, Mr. Speaker, in the budget on page 36, what did 
they say? They are still defending this approach, contrary to 
what the auditor had suggested. And this is a quote from 
2017-18 on page 36: 
 

The pension expense in the 2017-18 Estimates reflects cash 
requirements for the current year and an adjustment is 
made and reported in the 2017-18 Budget to account for 
the government’s pension expense on an accrual basis. 
 

Here’s the kicker: 
 

Because of the volatile, long-term and non-cash nature of 
the pension accrual adjustment, it is reported separately so 
as to not influence annual spending and taxation policies. 

 
A very, very, very clear statement by the government in 
2017-18 — the pension accrual adjustments would not be 
reported prior to the . . . in the expenses estimates. 
 
And if you go through this budget, Mr. Speaker, in 2017, you 
will find those asterisks on many, many pages. For example, 
you’ll find it on page 43, a little footnote: “Before the 
adjustment of account for pension costs on an accrual basis.” 
And this of course was in education and debt charges. And 
that’s where it becomes very significant in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Page 45 . . . oh sorry, that was the price of oil. Page 46, on the 
outlook itself, the financial outlook itself, there is that little 
asterisk that says, “Before the adjustment to account for pension 
costs on an accrual basis.” 
 
Where else do we have that reflected? We have it in a number 
of the reports at the end of the budget, Mr. Speaker. I’m just 
going to flip back to that section, the budget financial tables. 
The statement for accumulated deficit has a footnote, no. 2, 
“Before the adjustment to account for pension costs on an 
accrual basis.” 
 
The report on this change in net debt alone has before . . . a 
footnote, “Before adjustment to account for pension costs on an 
accrual basis.” We have . . . I think there are a few more spots 
in here, Mr. Speaker. However you could see where the 
government was very, very clear a year ago that they would not 
use these numbers to do their forecasting and to tell the people 
of Saskatchewan what they believed the outlook would be for 
finances in this province. 
 
There’s always a table. There’s always a table in the budget, 
Mr. Speaker, called the medium term financial outlook, and this 
is an outlook where they go from 2017-18, ’18-19, ’19-20, and 
’20-21. So you can see the variation in these adjustments is 
significant. It’s gone from a negative 820 million in 2016 to . . . 
And here’s the news this year. It’s up actually quite positive this 
year. It’s a $393.2 million positive adjustment. 
 
Well what has this government done, Mr. Speaker, when you 
have them refusing steadfastly to include this pension 



3748 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2018 

adjustment for the first three years of their four years of 
summary budget reporting, but all of a sudden they can’t resist 
because this year that positive number of $393.2 million is 
going to turn a $758 million deficit into a projected $365 
million deficit? So, Mr. Speaker, if this government had held 
steadfast and continued to refuse to do what they’ve done for 
the last three years, they would have had to report a $758 
million deficit, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to repeat that. They 
would have had to report a $758 million deficit, Mr. Speaker, 
this year if they had not had that positive pension accrual 
adjustment to pull out and insert so that they’re only projecting 
now a $365 million deficit. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, how in any planet would that be justifiable, Mr. 
Speaker? And I asked, why is this change being made? And no 
one could give me an answer. Now they didn’t do it in the 
budget last year. They didn’t do it at mid-term last year. The 
first time we see any suggestion of this change being made was 
in the third quarter reports at the end of February, Mr. Speaker. 
And you’ve got to wonder, why was that? Well interest rates 
had gone up a little bit, Mr. Speaker. So we know that our debt 
charges aren’t going to be as high. We know that our pension 
payouts and the adjustment for pension accruals are going to be 
more positive, Mr. Speaker. So someone at that point in time 
decided they were going to change how they reported. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is . . . I don’t know. I just feel like it is 
missing the mark, I think is as far as I can go in parliamentary 
language. And I would like to use other language, Mr. Speaker, 
but we’re not allowed in this House. I was able to talk about it 
more directly in the media, and I guess that’s one advantage. 
 
But if we look at the language that we find now in this year, the 
2018-19 budget that was handed out yesterday, it’s found on 
page 47. What is the government . . . What tune are they singing 
now? This is a whole new tune. Last year it was maybe a bit of 
an air in a minor key. It was a bit, you know, we can’t do this 
because it’s, you know, volatile and we don’t want to, you 
know, mess things up, despite the fact that the auditor thought 
they should. 
 
Now what do we say? Well here we go . . . Oh, I think I’ve got 
the wrong quote, Mr. Speaker. It’s on this page. Oh boy, I’m 
going to have to find it. I didn’t mark the right page, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s in here somewhere, so just bear with me. Oh, here 
we are. It’s on page 42, under expense. 
 
So the tune last year, I’m just going to reread that and I’m going 
to compare with the new song this year. It’s more like a jig. If 
you’re a fiddler, you’ll know what I’m talking about. But last 
year was a bit of a dirge, and this year it’s a jig . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . I think the member from Arm River likes jigs, 
Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure. I can’t quite hear what he’s saying. 
But he’s a fast dancer, that’s for sure. He’s got those toes 
tapping. As a House Leader, you’ve got to be a good toe tapper, 
that’s for sure. 
 
So here’s last year’s slow air: 
 

Because of the volatile, long-term, and non-cash nature of 
the pension accrual adjustment, it is reported separately so 

as to not influence annual spending and taxation policies. 
 
Here is the jig from this year, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Expense in the 2018-19 Budget includes pension expense 
on an accrual basis, consistent with the audited financial 
statements that appear in the Public Accounts. The 
2017-18 Budget has been restated to reflect this change. 

 
So good news for everyone, Mr. Speaker. Now that the pension 
accrual adjustment is a nice, positive $400 million, it’s perhaps 
time to include that in our budgeting and in our forecasting. 
They go on to say: 
 

Total expense is budgeted at $14.6 billion in 2018-19 . . . 
The change from last year’s budget includes a $404 million 
decrease in . . . pension liability (the pension accrual 
adjustment), reflecting prior-year actuarial losses that are 
finished being recognized in 2017-18 and new actuarial 
gains as a result of higher interest rates and other changes 
in actuarial assumptions. 

 
So what a good story, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got higher interest 
rates. We just found $400 million that we can now include in 
our forecast, so that this year’s deficit of $365 million would 
have been at $758.2 million yesterday if they had kept doing 
what they were doing in the three previous years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people are asking about that. I’ve had media 
question me about that. I’ve had people talk about it, and I just 
think that’s . . . When I say a budget is a story, it really is a 
story, and how you choose the story, you can use the language 
of ’17-18, this sad story of volatility and we really can’t include 
those numbers. And we have officials telling us that in 
committee, you know, volatile, long-term, non-cash nature; it’s 
reported separately. Three years in a row. Three years in a row. 
That’s what the public is being told. 
 
Now this year we have, oh geez, expense in this budget includes 
pension expense on an accrual basis, consistent with the audited 
financial statements that appear. And also, not only this year but 
last year we restated it as well. Mr. Speaker, I just find that 
that’s something that people really will have to look closely at. 
 
And I know my eyes glaze over when this stuff comes up, Mr. 
Speaker. Pensions, accrual, adjustments, what do those terms 
mean? They’re all highly economic terms. They’re the stuff of 
accounting. And even as a lawyer, you know, who can I know 
be very boring at times, it’s . . . accounting just, you know, my 
eyes glaze over. So I think that’s part of what this government 
hopes. 
 
But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to be asking those 
questions. I’m going to be asking in committee. I’m going to 
continue to ask them and to find out why the government 
suddenly in 2013 . . . or sorry, in the third quarter of ’17-18 
flipped the switch. And I think they have to be honest with the 
people of Saskatchewan. They have to tell us why those 
changes were made. And not just because we felt like it or, 
well, we thought it was a good time to do it or anything. 
Because the numbers tell a completely different story, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



April 11, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3749 

And so I think there’s many more things in this budget that are 
of concern, and we certainly will be doing that here in the 
House in the next few days. We will also be taking much more 
close looks at all of these estimates in committee. And for 
people that are watching, make sure that you check out the 
committee schedule. Because each ministry, we’ll be looking at 
it closely in committee and looking more . . . peeling off the 
layers a little bit of the high numbers and taking a look behind 
the curtain of the large numbers and digging into some of the 
details of this budget. And as I said yesterday, this is almost $15 
billion of Saskatchewan money, so this is no small change, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the role of the opposition, of course, is to shine a light on 
the spending of this government. We’ve seen spending like 
crazy in the last few years. We’ve seen the debt explode. So we 
have a lot to say and we have a lot of questions. But I think the 
motion that was tabled by the minister yesterday really got it 
wrong. And I’m going to actually propose a separate motion 
here, and I know it’s here because I’ve got it. And it’s a motion 
to amend, as my House Leader has pointed out, and so I’m 
going to read this motion at this point before I conclude my 
remarks. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move the following motion: 
 

That all the words after “that the Assembly” be deleted and 
the following be added: 
 

disagrees with the government for tabling a budget that 
fails to make smart investments to grow the economy, 
create jobs, prioritize education, and protect the most 
vulnerable. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Nutana has moved 
an amendment: 
 

That the words after “that the Assembly” be deleted and 
the following be added: 
 

disagrees with the government for tabling a budget that 
fails to make smart investments to grow the economy, 
create jobs, prioritize education, and protect the most 
vulnerable. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 
recognize the member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter into the debate. And you’ll notice that I still have a bit of a 
croaky voice. The member actually for Martensville and I were 
commiserating the other day about our voices and probably the 
joy that many people in this House feel by us not having quite 
the voices we usually do . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, but 
the member for Martensville has said her voice is better today, 
but anyway mine is not quite there yet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m pleased to rise to support the amendment put forward by 
my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana, the Finance critic for Her 
Majesty’s Loyal Opposition. It’s always a privilege to rise in 
this House and enter debate, and today is no exception. But 

before I begin my remarks on the 2018-19 Saskatchewan 
provincial budget, I would like to once again extend my 
condolences to the families and friends of all who lost their 
lives in the tragic Humboldt Broncos bus crash and send out 
best wishes for recovery and healing to those who were injured 
and impacted by this horrific accident. 
 
As difficult as it may be at a time like this to focus on the work 
in front of us, we all have jobs that we’ve been sent to do by the 
people of our province, and mine as a member of the opposition 
is to hold the government to account, and I intend to do just 
that. In my following remarks, I’ll focus my attention on my 
duties as critic in the areas of Health, seniors, and Status of 
Women, and touch on some areas that I know will also have an 
impact on the people of Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has titled their budget On Track, 
but after the review of this budget the question becomes, on 
track to what? My colleague from Saskatoon Nutana pointed 
out that for a second year in a row, this budget is certainly on 
track to higher taxes. 
 
Last year the Sask Party raised PST by close to a billion dollars, 
including adding it to restaurant meals and construction 
services. Talking to some smaller restaurant owners in the past 
while, I hear stories of how the PST has negatively impacted 
their businesses. I can think of one popular Riversdale 
restaurant that has had to cut its staff down from 16 to 11, the 
owner says, because of the PST increase. And according to a 
contractor constituent of mine, adding PST to construction 
services has been bad for business. In her words: 
 

PST is a definite problem. Not only does it take money 
directly out of my pocket on dollars earned, but it affects 
the ability to win contracts in the first place, [adding that] 6 
per cent an invoice can be very prohibitive to some of my 
lower income or more frugal clients, can mean the client’s 
overall budget is smaller to accommodate the extra 
taxation, which means I earn less, but I am taxed more. 
 
Some small companies are absorbing the cost of the PST 
so they are more competitive. I’m not interested in 
reducing the cost of my labour so the government can 
spend more with the same impunity they have thus far. 
 

And in this budget, the Sask Party continues the trend of 
picking more than change out of people’s pockets by adding 
PST to the purchase of a used car. I can think of lots of 
hard-working folks in Saskatoon Riversdale, hard-working 
families for whom an extra few hundred dollars on their 
purchase of a modest used vehicle will have a negative impact. 
Contrary to the Sask Party belief, there are many people who 
don’t have a few extra hundred dollars lying around. With 
bankruptcies on the rise here and mortgage arrears in 
Saskatchewan three times higher than the national average, it is 
clear that there are many people who are struggling to make 
ends meet, let alone find extra money to pay for Saskatchewan 
mismanagement and waste. 
 
The Sask Party is certainly on track to record debt, which will 
hit $20 billion by next year. Our province’s net debt will have 
increased by over 110 per cent since 2007, also by the end of 
this year. I think it’s important to point out that this is a 



3750 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2018 

government that has had record revenues at its disposal, more 
money than any government has ever had in the history of this 
province. And what have they done with it? They have spent it 
all, and more, adding billions in debt and I would argue, put us 
in a place where our footing is far less solid than it should be. 
And they have certainly not have used our resources well to get 
at the root causes of challenges facing our province, nor have 
they searched for long-term sustainable solutions to these 
challenges. 
 
In looking at this government’s commitments in health 
spending, I’d have to admit there are some positive measures — 
which I think it’s always important to note, and I’ll get to some 
of them — but I think it’s safe to say that many of these 
measures are, as they say, a day late and a dollar short. 
 
The Finance critic pointed out that this budget is one that is 
lacking in a plan and in leadership. But I would take this a few 
steps farther and say, the record of the Sask Party’s 
administration, especially in recent years, has been one devoid 
of long-term planning or envisioning a bold future. Instead, its 
record has been very much reactive rather than proactive as it 
becomes a tired government that is long in the tooth. I see that, 
especially in health. 
 
There’s some targeted money in this budget for long overdue 
mental health spending — 11.4 million for community-based 
mental health supports, of which 9.2 million comes directly 
from the federal government. Actually I am curious. The other 
2.2 million that the province is adding to this spending, does 
this include the approximately 1.5 million carry-over mental 
health money from the federal government from last year that 
the province received and didn’t see fit to spend? Or is that 
money accounted for in the 9.2 million? I’ll have a chance to 
ask that in committee. But either way, this spending is 
desperately needed. Saskatchewan has long been at the bottom 
of the list in Canada when it comes to mental health spending as 
a percentage of total health dollar spending, falling at about 5 
per cent. 
 
[15:15] 
 
It’s important to point out, even with this new targeted funding, 
we are still just at over 5 per cent of mental health spending as a 
percentage to health spending. The national average is 7 per 
cent, and organizations like the Canadian Mental Health 
Association have been calling on provinces and territories to 
increase that spending to 9 per cent. Places that are doing 
mental health better than others — like New Zealand, Australia, 
and the United Kingdom — spend anywhere from 10 per cent 
to 14 per cent of their health budgets on mental health. So we’re 
still at the bottom of the pack despite this new spending and 
targeted money from the federal government. 
 
I’ve just mentioned many numbers but the reality is that those 
numbers represent services and supports, or a lack thereof, for 
those living with and suffering from mental health issues. What 
does this 5 per cent mean here in Saskatchewan? It means a 
two-year wait for youth to see a psychiatrist. It means a 
government bragging about opening a mental health assessment 
unit where the capital is funded by a private donor, and only 
after much pressure, the government ensuring the popular unit 
is funded by forcing resources to be pulled from other areas of 

mental health and addictions to make it work. 
 
It means incredibly limited supportive housing options for those 
who could really benefit from step-down housing in the 
community. It means an end to sliding-scale, affordable 
counselling by some family service organizations; and instead, 
counselling being offered by social work and psychology 
students, not registered professionals with years of experience, 
for lower income citizens for a flat $25 rate. 
 
It means months-long waits for those seeking in-patient 
addictions help when they are desperately looking for support 
and to make change in their lives now. It means no strategy to 
deal with an emerging opioid crisis that is now reaching 
Saskatchewan after ravaging other parts of Canada. It means no 
help for the very real crystal meth crisis that has led to all types 
of increasing crime rates here in the province and strained our 
acute mental health facilities. It means no dedicated geriatric 
mental health supports for our aging population. It means 
emergency departments in our larger centres are often over 
capacity and can’t properly deal with mental health challenges 
who really should have received better supports in community 
in order to keep them out of the emergency department in the 
first place. It means young children in the North, who should 
have so much to live for, Mr. Speaker, but instead feel so 
hopeless that they die by suicide. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is what 5 per cent spending looks like in real 
terms, and that is why that $11.4 million is appreciated but falls 
dreadfully short of the mark. 
 
When it comes to health spending, I was glad to hear the 
government is finally delivering on its promise to families with 
children with autism spectrum disorder. It’s important to note 
that this is the third budget since that promise for individualized 
funding for children under six. So there are children who would 
have qualified for support if the government would have kept 
its election promise in the June 2016 budget, who are now no 
longer eligible. 
 
I’d also like to note that the impact of autism spectrum disorder 
does not end when a child turns six. Living on the spectrum 
requires a range of lifespan supports and we certainly should 
not ignore those over six. 
 
It’s also important to note that when children become 
school-aged, they stop receiving the health supports for those 
with autism spectrum disorder and begin to fall under the 
education system, which we know has been on the receiving 
end of massive cuts. Even with $30 million in partially restored 
funding this year, the education sector is far behind being able 
to support all students including those with varied challenges. 
The shortage of therapists of all disciplines — like occupational 
therapists and speech language pathologists to name a few — in 
the school system is very real. As well I continue to hear from 
folks in the community around the long waits to actually even 
get a diagnosis in the first place. 
 
I would be remiss if I didn’t mention too that $4,000 to a family 
in rural Saskatchewan, where there are few if any supports and 
services to purchase, does not go nearly as far as it does for 
those of us who live in larger centres. Time for parents to take 
off work, travel time, and accommodations to head to the larger 



April 11, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3751 

centres to access those services, to purchase those services, will 
quickly eat away at that money available to support their kids. 
 
I was glad to see the government say it would finally ensure 
universal funding for access to antiretrovirals for those with 
HIV. Although only a small number of patients didn’t have 
access to these medications, in a province with the highest rate 
of HIV in Canada and the number of new cases first . . . last 
year almost tripled the national average. These dollars are 
incredibly important. There’s also a small pot of money going 
to organizations doing important work in this area. 
 
But I submit the government’s current record on this issue is 
lacking and it needs to do more. It did have an HIV strategy 
from 2010 to 2014 after new cases of HIV peaked in 2009 at 
199. Following that, for five years numbers dropped to a low of 
112, but when the strategy ended, numbers began to go up with 
increases to 160 new cases in 2015 and 170 new cases in 2017 
— the only jurisdiction where the incidents have gone up in 
recently. It is time for the government to build with those who 
work in this area and who have lived experience with strategy 
to address the increases that are being seen in more remote and 
northern areas. 
 
As the Health critic, I hear from people all across the province 
about the challenges they face in paying for their prescription 
drugs. The federal government in its last budget is at least 
acknowledging the importance of a pharmacare program, 
although I do have some concerns from his comments that the 
federal Finance minister does not really understand what this 
program should look like to reap the greatest benefits. 
 
But there was not even a word in the Sask Party budget on the 
burden of prescription drug costs. I suppose one should be 
thankful that this government isn’t continuing its trend of 
making prescription drugs more expensive than they have in the 
past few years for seniors and families. But people should not 
have to decide between their medication and other necessities of 
life like food, shelter, or paying to keep the light and the heat 
on. I hear too many stories about folks not filling prescriptions 
or choosing to ration important medication to save money. With 
overcrowded emergency departments, this government should 
be very concerned when people can’t take their medications to 
manage things like chronic conditions that often land them in 
the hospital. 
 
The government increasing costs of medications is just one 
issue that I continue to hear about from so many seniors living 
on fixed incomes. I also hear from them about the rising cost of 
living under this government including the seemingly 
ever-increasing utility bills. In listening to the minister’s speech 
yesterday and doing initial comb-throughs of this budget, I 
didn’t hear or read the word “senior” uttered even once. We 
have an aging population here and there are many concerns 
seniors would like addressed including improving their cost of 
living through measures around housing, power bills, or 
prescription drugs. On housing, instead we hear that this 
government is cutting the rental house supplements. 
 
Unfortunately we did have references in last year’s budget with 
regard to seniors, whose effects still remain. Last year the 
government chose to pull more money out of the pockets of 
those living in long-term care, cut the hearing aid plan that had 

helped make hearing aids a wee bit more affordable, and 
shuttered STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company], which 
helped seniors, especially in rural and remote communities, stay 
connected to important things like medical treatment and 
family. Maybe seniors are thankful that they didn’t get 
mentioned in the budget from this perspective. But I knew 
many were hoping to see the government fund a seniors’ 
advocate, work on affordability, and improve the state of 
long-term care, which has for many years now been highlighted 
in the government’s own reports by the Ombudsman and the 
auditor as hugely problematic. 
 
When it comes to the state of care, long-term care facilities — 
and in other health care facilities for that matter — there’s 
something mentioned in this budget for which I have a huge 
concern. The government plans to cut $70 million from the 
budget in the next two years, they say, from what they call 
“efficiency measures and attrition.” I think I’ve even heard the 
words “vacancy management” related to the $70 million. 
 
I can tell you from the conversations I have with both health 
care workers and patients that they have been the victims of 
vacancy management under this government for years now, 
resulting in short-staffing, burnt out or injured staff, and patient 
and resident care that could and should be so much better. I’m 
not sure the Sask Party realizes this, but just because someone 
retires or moves jobs, that doesn’t mean his or her work ceases 
to exist. Not hiring someone new to replace someone vacating a 
position only means an increased burden on an already 
stretched health care workforce. 
 
There’s one last area that I’d like to mention that falls under my 
duties as the Status of Women critic. I heard the word 
“innovation” in this budget, particularly as it relates to 
technology. But I believe this government has missed an 
opportunity to tap into a key segment of entrepreneurs who 
could help increase jobs and grow the economy at a time we so 
desperately need it. 
 
Last fall we legislators had a chance to hear from Women 
Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan about the unique challenges 
facing women and the opportunities that lie in looking through 
a gendered lens when it comes to creating programs and 
policies meant to foster entrepreneurship. Just a few weeks ago 
we had another chance to hear about the issue at an event 
supported by a number of organizations, including Women 
Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan Chamber 
of Commerce, among others. I would’ve liked to have seen this 
government choose to foster innovation and some dedicated 
support for women entrepreneurs in this budget. 
 
There are so many things in this budget that I’d like to address, 
but we have a limited time to have our say and there are many 
members who would like to speak to this budget. I look forward 
to getting into committee and digging deeper on the items 
mentioned in this budget and in my remarks, and others that 
were conspicuously absent from the budget and that I haven’t 
had the opportunity to cover. 
 
One that jumps to mind that was mentioned in the Throne 
Speech is this government’s stated commitment to build a donor 
physician program to improve our abysmal organ donation rates 
here. I think this becomes even further magnified by the 



3752 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2018 

Humboldt Broncos tragedy and the wonderful gift of Logan 
Boulet and his family. Logan signed his organ donation card 
and his family carried through with his wishes, and six people 
will live because of this young man’s thoughtfulness and 
thinking of others beyond him, Mr. Speaker. So I look forward 
in committee to finding out where exactly we are around the 
commitment to donor physicians in the Throne Speech, and I’m 
wondering why it wasn’t mentioned in the budget. I’m 
wondering if there are actual resources available for it. 
 
But with that I’d like to echo my colleague from Nutana’s 
concerns with this budget — its lack of a plan, of hope, of 
inspiration, and of leadership. I know it is not just the 
opposition who is disappointed to see this, but people all across 
the province. For these reasons and more, I will be supporting 
the member from Nutana’s amendment and cannot in good 
conscience support this government’s motion. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s an honour to 
stand up in front of you today and it’s an honour and privilege 
to rise in the Assembly to speak in support of the Finance 
minister’s 2018-19 budget. 
 
We have just finished our second year being elected on our 
second anniversary, April 4th, and I’d like to start off by a few 
acknowledgments. First of all I’d like to thank my wife, Lorri, 
who’s been married to me for 33 years. She’s a nurse 
practitioner who works in Canora, and she’s one lucky woman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to acknowledge my family, my oldest 
daughter Jasmine Ostapowich who works for Walker Projects 
right here in Regina. She was at the budget yesterday and quite 
thrilled and excited of how good it was and that I’m here. Also 
my son-in-law Shane Ostapowich: he’s a manager at SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] right here in Regina. He 
played for the Regina Rams. And my one and only grandson, 
Lewis, he’s two and a half years old. He’s grandpa’s little boy. 
And he’s a Bruins fan, and this year he’s going to experience 
his first Stanley Cup as a Bruins fan. 
 
Then I have my daughter Jade Dennis living in Regina and 
working at the Correctional Centre right here in Regina. And 
she’s a great hockey player who played for the U of R 
[University of Regina] Cougars, and she’s a great sport. And 
yesterday was her birthday, so I’d like to wish her a happy 
birthday. 
 
Then I have Carson Dennis, my youngest son. He’s living in 
Melville and working at the golf course there the last five years. 
He’s turf management and this year he stayed in Melville and 
he decided to become an icemaker, so they talked him into . . . 
does curling ice and even got the old man out there to curl in a 
bonspiel with him, which I won’t elaborate too much into 
because it was horrible. 
 
I’d also like to thank my CA, Carol Sleeva, and my casual 
student, Abby Gulka who’s a university student, for all their 
help in taking care of my constituents and also myself. I’d also 
like to thank my executive and all my constituents for their 
continued support. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank my colleagues and the staff 
here for all their help over the last two years. And it’s been a 
special two years in my office at the legislature. We have seven 
in our office, and they’re family and friends and we’ve become 
really close. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last year I’ve seen a lot of change. We have 
lost two colleagues, Roger Parent and Kevin Phillips. Then we 
went through some tough budget in 2017-18 with some tough 
decisions. Along with that came changes to our Premier and our 
Finance minister, along with others. 
 
[15:30] 
 
But one main theme was kept. We as a government have a 
three-year plan to get back to balance, and although we have 
seen some tough decisions, we are showing that we are fiscally 
responsible and we’re on track to a balanced budget. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Don’t forget the Speaker. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — And the Speaker. Mr. Speaker, sorry — I 
forgot. I’ve had some good times with you too as well. Mr. 
Speaker, this budget keeps the plan on track with controlled 
spending while continuing to make investments in health care, 
education, social services, all while keeping our economy 
strong and growing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the change to our new . . . of our new Premier 
came some announcements and changes that are being fulfilled: 
increased education funding, reinstating the PST on life, health, 
and agriculture insurance. And finally, he will continue to fight 
to have no carbon tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget follows what we’ve heard from the 
Saskatchewan people: to control our spending while working 
towards a balanced budget. We will keep it on track and we’ll 
be balanced in 2019 and ’20 while supporting the growth of our 
economy. Mr. Speaker, we will continue to invest in our 
schools, roads, highways, hospitals, health care, education, 
social services, and we will not raise provincial tax rates, sales 
tax rates, income tax rates, and education property tax this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will provide high-quality services in health 
care spending of over 5.36 billion or 39 per cent of our total 
expenses this year. This includes $3.5 billion in health authority 
for operating funding, up 72 million from last year. We will 
provide funding to prepare for the North Battleford hospital and 
also help the Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital in 2019. There 
will be a $49.4 million increase in physician service and 
recruitment of new specialists and primary physicians. We will 
spend $700,000 additionally to ensure 100 per cent coverage on 
HIV drugs as well as providing HIV supports. We will invest 
$520,000 to screen babies for hearing loss that are born here in 
Saskatchewan. We will also look to fulfilling our government 
commitment to provide individualized funding for the children 
with autism disorder, initial funding of $4,000 per year for 
children under six years old, to a total of 2.8 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget will keep high-quality education for 
the K to 12 grade students. We will fulfill the Premier’s 
promise and increase funding by $30 million. This will result in 
an increased funding of the 27 divisions by 1.87 million in 



April 11, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3753 

operating fund. This will allow an additional hiring of up to 400 
teachers and other support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will provide $77 million in child care funding, 
$20.8 million of new federal funding through the Canada-Sask 
early learning daycare program. This will support the 16,000 
existing spaces and create 2,500 spaces by 2020. We will also 
continue to support libraries of more than $11 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our advanced education budget is up 1.5 per cent 
to 729 million. This provides stable funding to the 
post-secondary institutions across Saskatchewan — 
universities, colleges, tech schools — that are seeing no change 
from last year. 673 million is going to operating and capital 
grants to post-secondary institutions, including $470 million to 
the University of Saskatchewan, the University of Regina, and 
federated and affiliated colleges. $151 million is going to Sask 
Polytech and the Sask Indian Institute of Technologies and 
Gabriel Dumont Institute. 
 
Thirty million to the Saskatchewan regional colleges, and more 
than $22 million for repairs and maintenance throughout the 
post-secondary sector. Nearly $88 million is going to be 
allocated to the U of S College of Medicine, helping to ensure 
the college provides quality medical education. Saskatchewan’s 
post-secondary students will also benefit: $34 million in direct 
financial supports provided for this budget. 
 
This budget will also continue the graduate retention program, 
one of the most aggressive and successful youth retention 
programs in Canada, providing up to $20,000 in income tax 
credits for post-secondary graduates who live in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, social services and assistance will see a record 1.3 
billion on the budget, a $25 million increase. This will help 
support the vulnerable, the children in need, at-risk families, 
people with disabilities, seniors, and low-income people. $10 
million will be allocated to increase the adults with intellectual 
disabilities or mental health challenges. $10 million will be 
allocated to move people out of Valley View Centre to new 
community-based homes. $4.5 million for extended family 
members who are caring for at-risk children and youth. There 
will also be some funding, $250,000, to operate a new group 
home in La Ronge for five adults with intellectual disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget our government continues to 
address the problem with rural crime, of which you were part 
of, in studying . . . Part of the study. Sorry, Mr. Speaker, part of 
the study. Maybe you were creating some problems. And we 
will do some funding for the protection and response team that 
was launched last summer. The team consists of 258 officers 
who will have arrest and detention powers, including the 
municipal police, the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police], 
the highways enforcement officers, and the environment 
conservation officers. This budget will provide 4.9 million in 
new funding from the SGI enhancements to the rural crime 
strategy, which will allow to hire an additional 30 police 
positions. Additional funding of 2.4 million will be allocated to 
expand the early case resolution in Regina and Saskatoon to 
focus on the short-term remand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will be spending $2.7 billion on infrastructure 
investments in 2018-19, and here are some highlights. The 

Crown corporation will be spending $1.5 billion and $883 
million to SaskPower to renew distribution and transmission 
systems. SaskTel will be investing $298 million to increase and 
upgrade the wireless and wireline networks. $268 million will 
be spent on SaskEnergy to ensure safe and reliable services in a 
growing market. SaskWater will receive $34 million to address 
aging infrastructure and continue growth. 
 
In 2018-19, we’ll be spending $1.2 billion on the Saskatchewan 
Builds capital builds. 
 
Transportation and infrastructure will get 690.8 million: 330 of 
that million will go to the Regina bypass; 214 million will go to 
enhancement projects for highway repairs in rural 
Saskatchewan, including passing lanes in highways 6, 39, and 
interchanges in Warman and Martensville; 126 million for 
rehabilitation projects, which includes 280 kilometres of 
repaving; and $18 million for transfers to strategic municipal 
infrastructure programs; and 2.2 million for machinery, 
equipment, and accommodations and ferry capital. 
 
There will be $206.5 million allocated to the municipal 
infrastructure: 191 million in transfers to the New Building 
Canada Fund which will be allocated towards Clean Water and 
Wastewater Fund, the Gas Tax Fund, the Public Transit 
Infrastructure Fund, transit assistance, and Communities in 
Transition funding. Also $15 million in funding will be to help 
complete the north commuter parkway bridge in Saskatoon. 
 
K to 12 schools will also receive 76.4 million: 49.6 million will 
be provided for maintenance and renewal; 22.7 will be for the 
construction of schools in Rosthern and Weyburn; 1 million for 
facility assessments; and 3.1 million for relocatables. Advanced 
education will see $22.4 million allocated to provide 
preventative maintenance. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be spending $128.2 million in health: 
34 million for the construction to finish up the construction in 
North Battleford at the hospital; $65.4 million for maintenance 
and equipment; $200 million to complete the government’s 
commitment to Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital in Saskatoon; 
$7.2 million for electrical renewal in the provincial hospitals, 
and 1.5 for the ownership interest in laboratory equipment in 
Saskatchewan Health Authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker — no, I’m not done yet — this budget also 
provides stable, predictable funding for municipalities and 
nearly $250 million in municipal revenue sharing, an increase 
of almost 90 per cent since 2007. This amount was set through 
the established funding formula of one point PST in 2016-17. 
 
The government remains committed to providing predictable 
and stable funding to municipalities. Municipal revenue sharing 
of $241 million is allocated in this way: $155 million to urban 
municipalities, more than 68 million to rural municipalities, and 
18 million to northern municipalities. As well, our government 
continues to support programs and initiatives specifically 
targeted to the First Nations and Métis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the member from Saskatoon Nutana 
stated that the government has misspent money and has no plan 
for the future. I’m not really sure if she had the right budget 
book or the right year, but I’d like to shed some light on the past 



3754 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2018 

and give her some of these answers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she asked where the money’s gone. Well we 
reduced operating debt by over a billion dollars. Tax reductions 
have saved people more than 5.9 billion. We took 112,000 
people off the provincial tax roll; $4.3 billion in personal tax 
cuts; $1.3 billion in education property tax, saving $100 million 
a year to people. That is where the money has gone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, funding under this government invested in 
infrastructure over $12.5 billion since 2007; 1.4 billion for our 
health care system, more than doubled over the last 10 years. 
And some of the projects are the children’s hospital. We’ve 
built 15 new long-term care facilities; the Moose Jaw Hospital; 
and Saskatchewan Hospital. And we spent over $8 billion on 
highways, over 12 000 kilometres of road repaired and rebuilt; 
and nearly $1.5 billion to build and repair schools, 40 new 
replacement schools. And lots of renovations and maintenance 
and almost $50 million in maintenance and renewals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to touch on what we have done over 
the last 10 years as a government and reflect on the NDP’s time 
in power . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, I know. Mr. 
Speaker, population over the last 10 years has grew by a 
hundred and sixty-seven thousand dollars . . . people, sorry. 
Dollars — I’ve been talking dollars and cents all the time here. 
We’ve got the second-best job creation in Canada since, from 
2007-17. Saskatchewan has the lowest PST of any province 
with PST. 
 
Seven hundred and fifty more doctors and 3,400 more nurses in 
this province. We’ve got among the shortest wait times in 
Canada. We opened 15 long-term care facilities. We’ve tripled 
the seniors’ income plan from $90 to 270. We built 40 brand 
new and replacement schools and 25 major repairs and 
renovations. We’ve got 840 more teachers and 173 more 
student support teachers since 2007. We’ve increased operating 
and capital funding in post-secondary institutions by 53 per 
cent. 
 
[15:45] 
 
We have 8,500 more new child care spaces since 2007, 75 per 
cent increase. And we’ve increased revenue share funding by 
municipalities by almost 90 per cent since 2007. And also we 
have brought in STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] 
ambulance to Saskatchewan which we witnessed the value of 
them this past weekend, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now under the . . . Mr. Speaker, now I’ll go under the NDP 
record, give them a little history. Let’s go back to their history. 
Population dropped by 22,000 from ’96 to 2007. They had the 
worst job creation in Canada from 2000 to 2007. NDP raised 
the taxes 21 times in 16 years and raised PST four times to a 
record high of 9 per cent, and raising the gas tax twice. 
Saskatchewan lost 450 nurses, 173 doctors from 2001 to 2006. 
We had the longest surgical wait times in Canada and we closed 
52 hospitals and there was plans for more. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Really? 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Yes. Yes. They closed 1,200 long-term care 
beds. And there was no increase to the seniors’ income plan for 

16 years. Then they closed 176 schools from 2001 to 2007, and 
they dropped the number of teachers by more than 400. And 
they nearly had a tax revolt during that time. The NDP, they cut 
nearly $500 million out of municipal revenue sharing during 
this time, and they are complaining about us freezing the 
municipal revenue sharing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will compare our record to the NDP any day of 
the week. We will not take advice from the opposition and the 
new Opposition Leader who has a $2.5 billion wish list and his 
wish to impose a carbon tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I look at this budget, I see that we are on 
track with our plan to get back to balance in 2019-20, and we 
will continue to deliver the programs and the services for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Our government will continue 
investing in our infrastructure and we’ll keep this province 
strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I would like to thank our new Premier, 
our Finance minister for a terrific budget. I would like to end 
my speech by saying that I will be supporting and seconding 
this budget as it was presented. A motion . . . Sorry. I would 
like to make a motion to second it, and I will not be supporting 
the amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to begin my 
remarks today by thanking the member for Athabasca for his 
pre-emptory enthusiasm for my speech. I know he always 
appreciates when I get up, and so thank you to him for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my first opportunity: I want to congratulate 
you on your position of Speaker. I know that we had a chat 
about this earlier a few weeks ago, and I know that you take this 
job very seriously. But you also have the amazing ability to 
inject humour into our day, and we all know that we need that 
once in a while in this place. So congratulations to you, and I 
know that you’ll do a good job. 
 
I also want to welcome the new MLAs that are here, the MLAs 
from Kindersley, Swift Current, and Melfort. I know what it’s 
like to win in a by-election. You come in kind of on your own. 
It’s a little bit different than winning in a general election when 
you’ve got a cohort coming in with you. And luckily for these 
guys they’ve got three of them, so they came in together. And I 
want them to know that they are most welcome on our team, 
and we really are a team, Mr. Speaker. So welcome to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank my fiancé, John. He is a very 
patient man, both with me and with my job. I tend to be quite 
apologetic about the time I’m away from home, and every time 
I start going down that path his response every time is, you just 
go do what you have to do and I’ll be home. I’ll be here when 
you get back home. So I want to thank him. In pretty much 
exactly three months I get to marry the best man that I’ve ever 
met and so I’m pretty excited about that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, his story, his family’s story is one that we hear 
over and over again in Saskatchewan. His mom and dad and 
sister, and John, moved here from Greece in 1977 and 
immediately became contributors to our economy. They have 



April 11, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3755 

worked so very hard, and just a great story of a family that 
re-established themselves in Saskatoon and love every day 
they’re in Canada, except still, after all these years, the winters. 
Being in Greece would be slightly better than being here. 
 
I also want to thank my constituents, their ongoing support for 
me. I know that in 2007 when I was first elected, I sat down 
with community leaders and asked them for a list of things that 
they wanted me to do on their behalf. And I’m happy to report 
after 10 and a half years in government, that list has been 
complete, whether it’s a municipal water system for Hepburn or 
roads or schools and all the other things that they had asked. 
 
I want to thank my colleagues, both past and present, for their 
support of the things that I’ve brought forward over the years to 
make sure that these incredibly fast-growing communities, that 
their needs are being met. And because we have seen a decade 
of growth, Mr. Speaker, and that growth has been about the 
most prevalent in the cities of Warman and Martensville, and to 
sort of see our government step up and make sure their needs 
are being met is very encouraging to me as their MLA. 
 
I also wanted to congratulate the Finance minister on her very 
first budget. I know, we all know, that the Minister of Finance 
has had a very difficult few days, more difficult than a lot of us 
in this Chamber. And she’s one of the strongest people that I’ve 
ever met, and I’m so very proud to call her a colleague and even 
more proud to be able to call her a friend. So to the Finance 
minister: job well done in the face of adversity, and we’re all 
very proud of you. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the budget. 
Obviously the name of the budget is On Track. We made a 
commitment over the course of three years to get our budget 
back to balance, and the budget that was released this week 
does just that. We look across our country, whether it’s the 
federal government or I think most, if not all, other provincial 
governments have absolutely no plan. Their plan is to go deeper 
into debt, more borrowing without any hope of getting out of 
that in the short term. And that is not the tack that we wanted to 
take. 
 
We didn’t have any desire to kick this down the road to future 
generations. We took a look at this and decided that responsible 
spending was the way to go, and we are on track to get our 
budget back to balance while continuing to invest in our 
citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was interesting. It was noted earlier in question 
period, a tweet that the NDP put out when it came to our 
budget. And they said yesterday, and I quote, “Spending more 
in social services, corrections, policing, justice, and health care 
does not represent an investment.” 
 
Well I don’t know what would qualify as an investment. So I 
took the time to . . . We were just talking about grammar and 
words and I’m usually pretty good at those things, but just to 
make sure that I wasn’t offside, I went and found an actual 
definition of “investment” and it says, Mr. Speaker, “To 
commit money or capital in order to gain a financial return, or 
to spend or devote for future advantage or benefit.” I would 
argue that this budget does exactly that, Mr. Speaker, that we 
are investing, whether it’s health care or roads or education or 

policing or justice or the other things that the NDP had talked 
about yesterday. And, Mr. Speaker, one of those 
investments . . .  
 
And I found it interesting too that the Finance critic for the 
NDP, the member for Saskatoon Nutana, said there was no 
inspiration in here. I would challenge her to get out of this 
building and go talk to regular people, who I would suggest 
were inspired by some of the things that were in yesterday’s 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Capital Network said this, and I 
quote, “In today’s budget, the Government of Saskatchewan 
announced the creation of the Saskatchewan technology start-up 
incentive program.” They went on to say that “SCN anticipates 
the tax credit will inspire more investors to invest in 
Saskatchewan companies while providing them with the capital 
they need to grow beyond their start-up phase in 
Saskatchewan.”  
 
They continued on, saying: 
 

We applaud the efforts and commitment of our government 
towards growing Saskatchewan’s economy. This is a big 
step toward the right direction and we are looking to 
making this program a success. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it sounds pretty inspiring to me, and perhaps the 
member for Saskatoon Nutana would like to go out and meet 
with some of these people. 
 
But to go back to their quote saying that these aren’t 
investments, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure how paying 100 per cent 
for HIV drug coverage is not an investment. And to his credit, 
the Leader of the Opposition gave us credit for doing that, but it 
goes directly against the words of their Finance critic yesterday 
and the NDP in general saying that these things weren’t 
investments. I don’t know how targeted funding for children 
with autism isn’t an investment. It totally fits the definition that 
I just read, and anybody else in this place other than apparently 
the members opposite would understand that this is an 
investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure how screening babies for hearing loss 
is not an investment into the people of this province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the executive director of the Saskatchewan Deaf and 
Hard of Hearing Services said yesterday, and I quote, “This was 
the best budgetary thing that could ever happen in the province 
in my opinion. This is gigantic for us. This is huge.” And again, 
Mr. Speaker, I would say inspiring and offering hope.  
 
Again the member for Nutana said there was no hope in this 
budget. I would commit that every parent who has a child born 
in this province who will now have a hearing test done, there’s 
hope for those children and those parents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I guess also an odd thing for us to hear is 
saying that none of these things count as investment. The 
member for Saskatoon Nutana, their Finance critic, gets up and 
I think most of her speech yesterday and today focused on debt. 
At the same time, they stand up every day in this House and ask 
us to spend more. 
 



3756 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2018 

Mr. Speaker, their own platform that their leader put out, and in 
electing him leader they’re endorsing this platform. And they 
have yet to refute the costing of this. If they’ve got other 
numbers I’d like to see that. Although interesting enough, the 
Finance critic says she doesn’t like accounting so I’m not sure 
what she’s doing in her job, but she can explain that as well. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s two and a half billion dollars a year. Over a 
course of a government’s term it’s $10 billion in spending. 
They have a spending plan but, Mr. Speaker, they have 
absolutely no revenue plan. So exactly how are they planning 
on paying for this? 
 
They want to be government in 2020. It is incumbent upon 
them to tell the people of this province what they’re going to 
do. You can’t just say we’re going to spend, spend, spend on 
this side without telling people how you’re going to pay for it 
on the other side, and that is a gaping hole in their plan. So 
good on you for having all these great ideas of where you’re 
going to spend all this money, but how are you going to pay for 
it? If you want to be government, I think that is part of your 
responsibility, to tell the people of this province how it’s going 
to be paid for. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we do have a plan, and I think the people of 
this province understand that, especially as I said before, in 
light of what other governments are doing. And I want to quote 
Todd MacKay, the prairie director of the Canadian Taxpayers 
Federation. He said, and I quote, “I can’t think of any other 
government in all of Canada who’s actually trimming spending. 
I don’t know if a government has actually slayed a deficit 
without trimming spending, so when you see that spending 
number coming down it makes you feel good about the future.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Construction Association said, 
“The budget strikes a balance between eliminating the deficit 
while encouraging ongoing growth and investment in the 
Saskatchewan economy.” And, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what 
our plan is. We’re going to stay out of the lives of private 
business and let them do what they’re doing and continue to 
grow our economy while having an eye on a balanced budget 
next year. 
 
I went through the member for Nutana’s speech from yesterday, 
and it’s the usual doom and gloom, that the world’s coming to 
an end and the sky is falling. But the one thing that stood out for 
me, Mr. Speaker, is she highlighted a few things in that speech, 
but some of the very first things that she said in her speech in 
relation to our budget were increased SaskPower bills and cost 
of living for Saskatchewan residents. I thought that was pretty 
interesting considering their party endorses a carbon tax, Mr. 
Speaker. And what do you think is going to drive up power bills 
in our province and increase the cost of living for the people of 
our province more than a carbon tax? So I’m not quite sure how 
she can voice concern on one side and then on the other be the 
supporter of a tax which will increase the cost of everything. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they call our fight against a carbon tax a 
pointless crusade. Mr. Speaker, I would call it doing our job. 
Our job is to stand up for the people of the province, the people 
that we represent, and that is exactly what we plan to do in light 
of the federal government saying that they’re going to impose 
this carbon tax on us. So while the members opposite would 
wave the white flag and surrender to that, we will not. We will 

continue the good fight, Mr. Speaker, because it’s the right 
thing to do for the people of this province. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the member for Nutana talked about 
hope, and we know that there is hope in this budget. I read some 
quotes from organizations who see that hope with the funding 
and the investment that we have offered. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t think that the NDP are the owners of hope in this 
province. We’ve seen a marked change in the attitudes of the 
people in this province over the last 10 and a half years and we 
saw, Mr. Speaker, that in 2007, hope beat fear. It beat fear again 
in 2011. It beat it again in 2016, and I would contend that hope 
will again beat fear in the 2020 election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will end my remarks there. There are many who are coming 
after me to speak but, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting this 
budget. I believe it’s the right thing for our province, and I will 
not be supporting the amendment put forward by the member 
for Nutana. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour and a 
privilege to rise in this Assembly today and enter into the 
debate on our government’s 2018-19 budget. 
 
But before I get into the details on the budget, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to take this opportunity to publicly congratulate you on 
being elected to Speaker of this Assembly. The process to 
giving you this role is what democracy is all about and the 
privilege of having the choice to vote and choose who provides 
us leadership here in this Assembly, in our province, and in our 
country is nothing short of humbling. 
 
I’m also humbled by the honour and privilege it was for the 
opportunity to be able, as a female, to have been able to put my 
name forward for Speaker along with many of my male 
colleagues. So we are so fortunate and blessed to live in this 
country. My colleagues in this Assembly were all given the 
choice, and I am honoured to recognize you as Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to take this opportunity to once again 
thank the voters of my constituency. It is because of their 
confidence and trust in me to represent them that I am able to 
stand here before you in this Assembly. For the many that I 
meet with, listen to their concerns, and seek to address their 
issues, I hope I have served you well. I want to tell them that I 
am humbled and honoured by their support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday our Finance minister tabled a budget 
that provided a strong commitment to the people of this 
province; that would keep our economy strong, stable, moving 
forward; that will ensure essential high-quality services like 
health care, education, and social services are maintained and 
appropriately resourced; all while controlling spending, having 
no tax increases — which includes no carbon tax — and does 
return us to balance by 2019-20. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this tells me we do have a plan. We do offer hope 
and inspiration in this budget. We do show strong leadership in 
many areas and the future under this government is on track to 



April 11, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3757 

get back to balance in the next fiscal year. Not parked, as the 
opposition member from Saskatoon Nutana so dismally would 
like the people to believe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even though we have seen some resurgence in our 
resource sectors, they have not created the optimism in the oil 
and gas sector that there was prior to 2014. And I can tell you 
that oil companies in Lloydminster and the surrounding area 
have been slowly rehiring back skilled employees but with 
much more caution this time around. Mr. Speaker, it’s not about 
the unwillingness to drill or invest in new wells, but it is the 
inability to get their product to market. Amidst all the 
controversy over the development of pipelines, they continue to 
wait with a bated breath for our federal government to step up 
to the plate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this industry is a valuable and important economic 
resource for our economy and we must support the push to get 
pipelines approved and built. They are the safest way to get our 
oil to global markets. Oil and gas is responsible for an estimated 
15 per cent of Saskatchewan’s GDP and recent numbers — 
such as increased production, exploration, and revenue — have 
shown clear signs of renewed activity and growth in the 
industry. Saskatchewan is the second-largest producer among 
Canada’s provinces, accounting for an estimated 12 per cent of 
the nation’s crude oil production. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a government and as an oil-producing province, 
we stand behind the need to get construction going on the 
Kinder Morgan Trans Mountain expansion pipeline. Canada is 
an exporting nation and, more specifically, Saskatchewan’s 
exports are precisely our source point of wealth and they are job 
creators. The continuous delays are not only frustrating to 
Kinder Morgan, who has put huge investment in this project 
already, but to all the oil companies here in Saskatchewan who 
already saw the discard of the Energy East pipeline. Mr. 
Speaker, our government will continue to stand up and speak 
out for pipelines. 
 
I’m also happy to note that the 2018-19 budget will see 
significant enhancement to the province’s petroleum and 
mineral resource sectors, providing incentive programs to 
encourage mineral exploration and tap into an unrealized 
potential that we have right here in Saskatchewan, allowing us 
to diversify our mineral sector. It’s also an opportunity for job 
growth in our northern and rural communities. 
 
The Fraser Institute, in its recent 2017 survey for mining 
investment, ranks Saskatchewan second out of 91 jurisdictions 
in the world for mining investment attractiveness. Preliminary 
estimates indicate the value of our mineral sales for 2017 were 
at 6.4 billion. And we continue to remain strong global leaders 
in uranium and potash production as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past decade our province has grown by 
167,000 people. With that growth comes the need for new and 
continuous renewal of infrastructure. This includes schools, 
hospitals, long-term care homes, housing, roads, and highways. 
We have invested $12.5 billion in infrastructure needs in this 
province since 2007, an average of 1 billion per year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our commitment in this 2018-19 budget continues 
to provide the necessary investment that will give our citizens 

valuable assets now and into the future. That’s what they are, 
Mr. Speaker, valuable assets. Our investments now will always 
have a dollar figure attached to them but, more importantly, 
they will be there for the citizens of this province to enjoy and 
use now and into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last decade I have seen new schools in 
my own constituency, gym replacements, additional 
preventative maintenance renewal funding for schools, daycare 
spaces, new hospital equipment, and just recently, a new CT 
[computerized tomography] scanner. Next week we will be 
breaking ground for a new STARS helipad. 
 
There has been new homeowner units and rental repairs for 
Social Services housing; new home ownership funding for 
low-income families under the CHIP [community housing 
initiative program] program; kilometres of highways repaired 
and improved; financial support to renovate a newly acquired 
community youth centre; financial support for work readiness, 
youth, and adult skills training; and significant dollars invested 
in victim services supports, addiction and treatment programs, 
our sexual assault centre, 24-hour crisis, residential services, 
and financial support to Onion Lake First Nation for their youth 
justice reintegration program. All of this in my own 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this 2018-19 budget has committed additional 
dollars to health, education, and social services once again, 
which supports, once again, almost all of these areas I just 
mentioned. This truly is an investment in the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, this budget continues to provide strong, 
predictable, and stable funding for municipalities. Municipal 
revenue sharing for Lloydminster went from $713,166 in 2007 
to over $2 million in 2018-19, a 190 per cent increase, allowing 
the local municipal government to make important and 
necessary investments for its citizens. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much? 
 
Ms. Young: — 2,071,568. The 2018-19 budget will invest 206 
million in municipal infrastructure, including 190 million for 
cost-shared federal infrastructure programs. Mr. Speaker, I 
know how important these infrastructure dollars are to the 
municipalities in my constituency. The RM [rural municipality] 
of Frenchman Butte has benefited from this type of 
infrastructure partnership in helping them to build a new lagoon 
system to support three rural communities in their area. 
 
The city of Lloydminster has been working closely and 
co-operatively with our Minister of Environment and 
SaskWater to move forward a long-overdue waste water 
treatment plant. They have committed, along with federal 
government support, to get this project moving as quickly as 
possible, but they are being held up by the lack of a willing 
conversation and commitment of the Alberta NDP government. 
Two-thirds of the citizens of Lloydminster flush their toilets 
into the system on the Saskatchewan side of the border city. I 
fear this may have to be another one of those shut-off-the-tap or 
throw-the-switch to back up the flow in order to get their 
attention. 
 



3758 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2018 

Mr. Speaker, farming and ranching has been a long-standing 
staple of our Saskatchewan economy, and it is a significant 
driver to the economy and most certainly to the livelihood of 
the people in my constituency. We are proud of our 
Saskatchewan farmers and ranchers who work hard to ensure 
our economy stays strong and provides food to the world. There 
is no one commodity whose producer spends more time 
watching the weather, agonizing over it, procrastinating about 
it, yet thanks the Lord when all goes well. 
 
Saskatchewan producers harvested a crop of about 35 million 
tonnes in 2017, the fifth consecutive year the provincial harvest 
has been more than 30 million tonnes. Saskatchewan’s 2017 
agriculture exports were the fourth largest on record with total 
sales of 13.5 billion, an increase of more than 60 per cent since 
2010. So it’s good to see in this budget the continued 
investment of 378.6 million to help ensure a strong agricultural 
sector, including a record investment for agricultural research 
and for business risk management programs. 
 
We all know, through the history of our province and our 
farming communities, that farmers have been our most 
innovative, creative, and flexible people we could ever imagine. 
Just read a local history book and think of where farming is 
today — new crops, new cattle breeds, new farming methods 
and techniques, new technological advances in equipment, and 
much more — and then you will appreciate not only the 
adversity our farmers have faced, but the strength and ingenuity 
they have achieved to become a significant and major 
contributor to the province’s GDP. The 31.8 million agriculture 
research budget will foster and support the new technologies to 
help grow and advance our farming and ranching industries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget’s investment in the justice system 
assures the people of this province, and particularly the rural 
areas in my constituency, it assures them that we are listening. 
The northwest area of our province has seen a dramatic increase 
in the number of property crimes and criminal activity. The 4.9 
million to assist the protection and response team and the 
annual funding of 1 million from the Ministry of Corrections 
and Policing is welcome news for my constituents. Since the 
new year, additional temporary special force teams have been 
deployed to some of the rural communities in my constituency 
to assist with patrolling and investigations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take this opportunity on behalf of myself 
and my constituents to say thank you to the RCMP and crime 
units for these additional efforts. It is very much appreciated. I 
know more work needs to be done on this, but I know we are 
moving forward on the training of 258 armed officers who will 
have arrest and detention powers. Hopefully the additional 
forces will roll out soon in the coming months and provide 
those much needed extra eyes and attention to what has become 
a serious situation in our rural areas of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this past Sunday I had the privilege of attending 
and participating in our community’s Métis Local 18 family 
culture day in Lloydminster. There was traditional bannock and 
soup served, great music, and lots of jigging to entertain the 
crowd of approximately 200 people who came out with their 
families. They received funding and support through the 
Gabriel Dumont Institute to provide cultural programs and 
activities for their members and to be able to add their 

wonderful cultural experience and history to the diversity of our 
community. I’m glad to see our government support of $200 
million for targeted program funding to First Nations and Métis 
organizations in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been a government that has always 
recognized and supported the needs of our most vulnerable in 
society. The 2018-19 budget once again increases the Ministry 
of Social Services’ budget by 54.4 million or 4.8 per cent. 
These additional funds are aimed at supporting at-risk children 
and adults with intellectual disabilities, and supporting the 
caregivers and community-based organizations that work daily 
to support the needs of these individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to control spending and finding 
savings, such as we have done, by reducing the number of 
government-owned vehicles; working with our unions and 
organizations to reach satisfactory and cost-saving, sustainable 
agreements; and finding cost-saving efficiencies within our own 
ministries and government agencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do have a deficit. But, Mr. Speaker, unlike 
other provinces who would rather spend into oblivion and don’t 
seem to care about the financial burden they are placing on our 
future generations — or even like our NDP opposition who 
plans to spend 2.5 billion a year without any indication of 
where those dollars may come from and will burden my 
children and grandchildren with unimaginable debt — this 
government will continue to reduce our debt by controlling our 
spending, growing our economy, and investing in the priority of 
the people, that being health care, education, and social 
services. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the job of the opposition to criticize, but when 
they tweet out a statement after the budget that says, “Spending 
more on social services, corrections, policing, justice and health 
care does not represent an investment,” I find this utterly 
ridiculous. A statement like this is complete nonsense, and the 
people of Saskatchewan know this. Mr. Speaker, if anything 
from the opposition is ridiculous, it’s the spending of 2.5 billion 
per year of taxpayers’ dollars without costing out your plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do have a plan. We do have much hope for the 
growth and prosperity of our province and people. We do have 
inspiration from those who have chosen to elect all of those you 
see sitting on this side of the House to lead them forward. We 
do have strong leadership in our forward-thinking, 
strong-willed, conscientious, passionate, and caring leader — 
our Premier. And we are on track to create a renewed and 
exciting, strong Saskatchewan for another decade to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the 2018-19 budget submitted 
in this Assembly by the Minister of Finance, and I will not be 
supporting the amendment put forward by the opposition. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to be joining the debate, the motion for the budget, our 
budget this year of 2018-19. 



April 11, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3759 

To start off with, I will join some of the other members that 
have mentioned . . . again, I did do some condolence motions 
this week of course for the town of Humboldt, the Broncos, and 
all those affected by the terrible tragedy this week. But again I 
just want to reiterate that Humboldt and everybody affected by 
that tragic accident is in our thoughts and prayers and will 
continue to be for some time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is going to be interesting to talk to. I’m 
going to touch on some of the areas at fairly high level. I’ll dive 
deeper maybe into some of the health portions of the budget. 
 
But first off I do want to specifically thank a lot of different 
people. And I know we do customarily do that, but this past 
year’s been a bit of a different experience for me, and there’s a 
lot of people that I really do need to thank. 
 
First and foremost, my family. We have some new members 
coming into the family. We actually have, our eldest daughter is 
engaged; she’s going to be married this June 30th. And Mark 
Cuthill, her fiancé, is going to be joining our family officially 
although he’s been a member of our family for some time 
already, as well as his two daughters, our soon-to-be 
granddaughters officially — Raya and Malaya are just a great 
addition to our family as well. 
 
I’ve talked about my granddaughter Wynnslet quite a bit, and 
she’s become a bit of a social media sensation. I think her 
family’s pretty proud of her. But just this last Thursday we were 
pleased to welcome another member to our family. Otto 
Gregory Krahenbil, our new grandson just joined the world here 
last Thursday at 7:16. I was able to be there for his birth and 
actually get a picture with him about three minutes old. So that 
was a lot of fun. And you know, it’s just great to have more 
people coming into the family and growing our family in that 
way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again support in personal life has been great and the support 
that they do give me enabling me to do this job. As many would 
know, when you’re doing this job, during session you’re here 
four or five days a week and outside of session I’m usually here 
two, three, four days a week. So I am away from home quite a 
bit. I try and get home on weekends. But I am so appreciative of 
the support and the love that I do get from my immediate 
family. 
 
Of course we can’t do this job, we can’t do our job without our 
staff support, Mr. Speaker. My staff back in Yorkton, Lauretta 
and Rachelle, do an amazing job representing me and doing the 
case work day to day back home. So I want to give them a huge 
shout-out and thank you. Of course the staff here in Regina, the 
ministry, the minister’s office staff both in the Minister of 
Health and the Minister of Rural and Remote Health’s office 
has worked very much together, and we just couldn’t do our 
jobs without them. So I’m very appreciative of their support, 
both personally and work support as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course our colleagues. Our former premier, Brad Wall, who 
is now gone on to a different part of his life, he was just such a 
great support, such a great leader. We do miss him, but you 
know, we’re just so happy for him moving on and again moving 
on to the next part of his life. But of course our new Premier, 
and I would count as a friend, the member from 

Rosthern-Shellbrook is doing just an amazing job and he’s 
growing into that role in an amazing way. And I recognized that 
before in the work that he had done in the different files that he 
had held, representing us around this province and even 
nationally and internationally. And the way he’s growing into 
this new role as Premier and leader of our party is just . . . an 
amazing, amazing job he’s doing. So we’re just so thankful for 
him. 
 
I’d be remiss if I didn’t mention my friend and colleague that I 
work with day to day, the Minister of Health . . . the member 
from Rosetown is a great support and friend as well. And I’m 
going to refrain from poking at him because he’s right here and 
he might . . . But he’s a great friend, and I really do appreciate 
his support and being able to work with him every day. 
 
Of course my fellow MLAs, I’m very proud of all of them. 
They’re great colleagues and do a great amount of work, and 
really represent their constituencies very well. I want to give a 
specific mention to two of my neighbouring MLAs: one from 
Canora-Pelly, and the Minister of Government Relations, the 
member for Melville-Saltcoats. Over the last year there’s been a 
lot of situations where I wasn’t able to attend maybe some 
events and things at home, and they were always willing to step 
up and cover me off in my Yorkton constituency. So I’m just so 
thankful for them as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And of course our three new MLAs on this side of the House — 
the member for Swift Current, the member for Kindersley, and 
of course the member for Melfort — that just joined us over the 
last little while, Mr. Speaker. So thankful to have them on this 
side of the House, winning those elections, but more so the 
contribution that they have and will be making to the 
government and representing their constituencies in the coming 
years that they will serve here, Mr. Speaker. So congratulations 
to them. 
 
And of course congratulations to you on your new role as 
Speaker, Mr. Speaker. I count you as a friend as well, and so far 
you’ve been very kind to me — you haven’t thrown me out of 
the House — so I’m appreciative of that, and you’re doing a 
pretty good job. So we’ll try and stay on your better side. 
 
Of course all the people of the constituency of Yorkton that 
have given me the honour of serving them here, I’m very 
appreciative of them, and of course for the support, I will 
mention too, that I’ve gotten from them over the last year, year 
and a half, Mr. Speaker. And also the people we work with day 
to day in the caucus office, and more specifically with the 
Minister of Health and I — the deputy minister, his office with 
the assistant deputy ministers, all their support staff. 
 
Of course our new Saskatchewan Health Authority, all the 
executive that is running that new health authority, the work 
that they’re doing. Almost a seamless transition to the single 
health authority, Mr. Speaker. I want to mention them and of 
course the great work that they’ve been doing, and so thankful 
of them, the CEO, Scott Livingstone, and the work that he’s 
doing over there. And you know, Mr. Speaker, I had a lot of 
faith in Scott when he was named to that position. And the work 
that I’ve seen him do at the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency over 
the years, how he’s taken . . . how he’s led that agency to a 
point of, you know, delivering a very specific health care 



3760 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2018 

service, but delivering it effectively, both urban and rural and 
remotely in this province, specifically cancer care, which can be 
quite broad in delivery. 
 
But the way they’ve done such a great job in building that 
system and delivering that service to people around this 
province regardless of where they live, and taking some of that 
philosophy and some of that experience and now moving into 
the Saskatchewan Health Authority, I have a lot of confidence 
in the work that him and his team are going to be able to do, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
As with any budget, there’s some things we can point to 
specifically for our communities, for our constituencies, but 
also realizing that so many of the things that are in this budget 
do impact the province and namely our constituencies directly 
and sometimes indirectly. So I’m going to just touch on a lot of 
those. I know my fellow members and ministers are going to be 
focusing more on some of their portfolios and some of these 
other things. So I’m going to briefly touch on some of those, 
and I’ll focus more on the health portfolio as time allows, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So of course the theme of this budget is on track, as been 
mentioned, and that’s because our balanced budget approach is 
on track. Of course many realize we were over $600 million 
deficit last year, being able to achieve a plan of 365 million this 
year and moving to a $6 million surplus the next year. And then 
on the out-years, 108 million and $212 million surpluses, very 
achievable and planning for those in the coming years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Of course, how are we going to do that? Well there’s a number 
of different ways we’re going to be able to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
First and foremost, something we’ve strived very hard to do 
over the last number of years is controlled spending. And as 
many I think realize throughout the province that, you know, 
controlling government spending is a necessity. And one of the 
things that I think some aren’t really aware of is that we’ve 
been hit with a resource revenue reduction because of the soft 
oil and potash, uranium, and other resource sectors of about 1 to 
$1.3 billion per year over the last three, you know, coming up to 
four years. 
 
So we’ve had to do a lot of initial work over those years to 
offset some of those losses. So that work has undergone a lot of 
work, a lot of attention, and gotten just to the point that we’ve, 
you know . . . Admittedly, last year we had to make some 
difficult decisions to start bringing ourselves back to balance. 
 
But looking at some of the initiatives that we have done over 
the years that continue to happen, the Minister of Central 
Services, my seatmate, some of the initiatives he’s done with 
reducing the CVA [central vehicle agency] fleet or maybe 
eliminating executive air services to save money in that respect, 
Mr. Speaker. So a lot of those things we’re doing internally to 
save money. Some of the reductions that have happened over 
the years in Executive Council, in the Premier’s office, in 
staffing situations right here in this building have helped save 
some money. So I think we’re leading by example. So we’ll 
continue to do what we can in controlling spending in as many 
areas as possible without impacting people to the best of our 
ability, as much as we possibly can. 

Of course this budget, we talked about quite a bit about no tax 
increases. Although with the PST, we have done a little bit of a 
shift when it comes to used cars, but for the most part, no tax 
increases. And first and foremost, the most important thing is 
we are not going to implement a carbon tax, which I know 
many members across the floor seem to support. But, Mr. 
Speaker, when you think about even some of the criticism 
we’ve gotten recently about the 60-some-odd million dollars 
that the federal government had offered if we implemented a 
carbon tax over a four-year period — you know, 10, $15 
million a year — to do that, we’d have to implement a $4 
billion impact to the people of this province, something we’re 
not willing to do, and we will not do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When it comes to fulfilling some of our commitments to some 
of the expectations of the people in the province when it comes 
to the services that they require or expect, Mr. Speaker . . . I 
will talk about health care a little bit more in depth in a moment 
or two. But of course my friend, the member from Saskatoon 
Northwest, the Minister of Education, our Deputy Premier, 
some of the money that he put back into the budget — 7.5 
million in-year funding last year, 30 million this coming year 
for classroom supports — I think is a very good move and very 
appreciated by the sector. 
 
A lot of the funding increases that have gone to foster families, 
caregivers, community-based organizations — I think $10 
million additional funding to CBOs [community-based 
organization] this year, Mr. Speaker. Investments in the North 
such as the group home in La Ronge and other investments, Mr. 
Speaker. And even some of the other investments when it 
comes to infrastructure or programs, say specifically through 
the health authority, that do directly impact the North. We know 
previous to the health authority development that the northern 
regions actually realize the higher increase in their spending in 
the northern health regions than most of our southern health 
regions, Mr. Speaker. So I believe we are paying attention to 
those needs and trying to respond as best as we can. 
 
When we look at infrastructure investments, there’s been 
significant infrastructure investments. I know the member from 
Canora-Pelly that was seconding the motion talked about some 
of those, the significant investment we’ve made in 
infrastructure over the years in multiple ministries, whether it’s 
highways, hospitals, and healthier schools, and across the 
board, Mr. Speaker. And those investments continue. 
 
Not a whole lot of new capital investments this year, but 
continued investments in infrastructure to finish some of these 
very important projects that we have been working on, namely 
the children’s hospital, the Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital, the 
Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford and others, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We see some significant investments in infrastructure as well 
when we look around the province, although some of these are 
specific to Regina or Saskatoon, whether it’s the bypass or 
whether it’s the bridge project up in Saskatoon. But so many 
people from here do go to those communities, and it does help 
them when they’re moving around those communities. But it 
also helps our economy, which benefits our whole province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 11, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3761 

And of course I would be remiss if I didn’t mention a lot of the 
twinning and the passing lane projects that we’ve undertaken. 
And in this budget a million dollars put towards planning and 
design of the passing lanes between Melville and Canora which, 
as you would know, goes right through Yorkton. So a lot of that 
traffic that does move between Yorkton and Melville, Yorkton 
and Canora, realizing these passing lanes will just be a great 
asset to our community and of course increase highway safety 
there in the coming years. 
 
Plus my understanding is the design will include some work 
around the intersection just north of Yorkton that turns truck 
traffic, a lot of heavy truck traffic into the P&H [Parrish & 
Heimbecker] plant. It turns them into the Grain Millers plant, 
one of the largest oat processors in North America, I believe it 
is. And of course Grain Millers Road leads right down to the 
canola plant, so in the coming years, you know, planning on 
getting that connection done so we can move that truck traffic 
through that intersection and down to some of those facilities. 
 
I think it’s been spoken to at length so I’ll just touch on some of 
these, Mr. Speaker: keeping our economy strong; of course 
funding through the Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership; increasing our export capacities; some of the new 
tax incentives, namely the Saskatchewan value-added 
agriculture and Saskatchewan technology start-up programs that 
support investment, job creation, and productivity; and then of 
course incentive programs to encourage mineral exploration and 
grow and diverse our mineral sector, which we know a lot of 
our family members and neighbours do work in these sectors, 
whether it’s potash, oil, gas, and the like, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:30] 
 
So I did talk a little bit about keeping our balanced budget on 
track and where we’re going from here, Mr. Speaker, the tax 
changes that I did speak about. One thing I want to touch on 
briefly is our revenue sharing with our communities. And I 
understand our local community of Yorkton initially was 
impacted probably one of the hardest percentage-wise. You 
know, when I realized that we were being impacted by a high 
percentage, I initially . . . I immediately called the Premier and 
some of my colleagues and asked, you know, is there something 
we can do, not only specifically for Yorkton, but to minimize 
the impact on some of our municipal partners? 
 
So that’s when we came up with the plan to cap these impacts 
by 30 per cent, which effectively went from a $1.6 million 
impact to the city of Yorkton, returning half of that down to an 
$800,000 impact. So I think they were thankful for that return, 
although slightly disappointed as to what . . . the way the 
program had rolled out, but realizing that we were going to 
move to a new revenue-sharing program, but specifically 
something to replace the grants-in-lieu, which was . . . has been 
pointed out, is kind of an ad hoc and doesn’t really make a lot 
of sense and is quite an unbalanced and unfair program. 
 
So what we moved to this year, there’s a little bit of backfilling 
capital that keeps places like the city of Yorkton, my own 
municipality, from having any further impact from last year, but 
also moving to a new plan that actually impacts or actually pays 
for the grants-in-lieu, grants-in-lieu of property taxes. So 
government entities, Crown corporations within my 

municipality, we’ll be getting those grants-in-lieu to offset those 
taxes that they don’t collect. So that’ll be a direct, 
understandable program to cover those grants-in-lieu. 
 
And then we look at some of the other programs that were sort 
of all over the map when it came to some of the grants-in-lieu, 
so to speak, that came from Crown corporations. And of course, 
as you realize, we’re moving to a surcharge system that will put 
those monies back directly into that community that are 
collected from that community. So initially there shouldn’t be a 
very large impact, a zero impact to my community, but as we 
are a growing community, as industry comes, as people come, 
and the usages of some of these sources increase, they will 
increase over time, an increase in that income. And I’m very 
confident that it will be a very good plan, a better plan than is 
right now, and a very fair plan going into the future, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So just in general, you know, we’re supporting a strong and 
growing economy. We’re investing again in health care, 
education, social services, protective services. I think I 
mentioned the $4.9 million — maybe I didn’t — going to the 
rural crime strategy, which is very important, not only in some 
of these areas that have been in the news lately but also in 
communities like my own where we do have a lot of rural areas, 
a lot of farmers, that they want to feel safe as well. So I’m 
thinking and I’m believing that with the increase in police 
presence, with some of the other partners in the rural crime 
strategy, we’re going to have a very effective system now and 
into the future. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of the plan that 
of course was originally put in place by our former premier, and 
carried on by this Premier with some additional changes, that is 
I believe paying dividends to our province. 
 
I just want to briefly go through, of course, some of the 
investments in health care which is the portfolio that I 
co-minister with the member from Rosetown. We know that 
there is an additional 2.5 per cent lift in health care which I 
think is appreciated by many. We have the $3.5 billion for the 
Saskatchewan Health Authority which does include 25 million 
for the general operating and pressures; $19 million of the 
federal funding to support the provincial connected care 
strategy to improve access to community-based and team-based 
community health care services and primary care services to our 
community settings. 
 
And we know, through some of the work that was done through 
the accountable care unit in Regina . . . And we’re expanding 
that program of course here and into Saskatoon as well. And 
then with some of the communities, health services that will be 
integrated over time with a team-based approach are going to be 
very proactive and I think getting our population healthier and 
offsetting some of those pressures in our emergency rooms, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Of course we know we have the investment to phase in the 
increased physician capacity at the Jim Pattison Children’s 
Hospital, of course money in the budget to implement the 
staffing and the start-up of the Saskatchewan Hospital North 
Battleford. You know, the additional funding that is coming 
both federally and provincially to improve mental health 
services throughout the province, not only just families but 
children and many other people, Mr. Speaker. And I think a lot 



3762 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2018 

of the members have already spoken about the universal 
newborn hearing screening program that has $523,000 in 
funding. 
 
Of course, capital funding, I spoke about some of the big 
projects: the children’s hospital, the Saskatchewan Hospital 
North Battleford, but also some of the other smaller funds that 
are going to upkeep maintenance and improve some of the 
electrical services in some of our specifically major hospitals, 
and of course those funds that are going to finish those projects 
that are already under way. 
 
A fairly big chunk in this budget, Mr. Speaker, is the $49.4 
million additional money for physician services. And that’s 
because not necessarily that we’re less healthy but it’s because 
we have a growing province. We have 160,000 additional 
people here. We have a younger population. A lot of our seniors 
are living longer and of course staying in the province, not 
moving off to BC, to Kelowna or wherever to retire. That does 
impact our health care system. So we have additional pressures 
so we are of course putting extra money in this budget to offset 
some of those physician pressures and continue with the plan 
we have been doing, with training more doctors and hiring more 
doctors, nurses, health care professionals. Contrary to some of 
the words of the members opposite about cuts in health care, we 
have more doctors, more nurses, more care aids, and all the like 
all the way through the health care system that will work in this 
province year over year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One thing I know the Leader of the Opposition, that’s very 
close to his heart and something we’re very proud to put in play 
this year, Mr. Speaker, was the additional funds for the HIV 
strategy. Not only $50,000 to AIDS Saskatoon, $50,000 to the 
Westside Clinic, but also the $600,000 additional to provide 
100 per cent funding for HIV drugs, Mr. Speaker. And we 
know that it’s very important that we do get this under control, 
that it is a very communicable disease. But as long as we make 
sure that these people have access to their medications — and 
they are easier-to-take medications now, Mr. Speaker — we can 
start getting ahead of this terrible, terrible disease. 
 
One thing I have to admit I sort of shook my head at this 
afternoon during question period, the Leader of the Opposition 
referring to us adopting some of their ideas. I’ll point to one, 
Mr. Speaker, the individualized funding for autism services. I 
don’t remember ever hearing the NDP talking about that, but 
here’s their idea of autism services: $500,000 annually, Mr. 
Speaker, $500,000. We upped that autism support to $8 million 
and now with this additional $2.8 million in support to 
individual autism services, Mr. Speaker, that’s I think a far cry 
from their idea of $500,000, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The additional money going to the Canadian National Institute 
for the Blind, I know they’re very appreciative of that. They’re 
doing great work so we’re happy to support them. And of 
course the extra money going to Fetal Alcohol Spectrum 
Disorder Network to help them with their work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course mental health is very important to everybody in this 
House, important to everybody in this province, specifically in 
light of some of the tragedies we’ve seen in the North, some of 
the tragedies we’ve seen around the province with youth and 
unfortunately sometimes resorting to suicide, Mr. Speaker. And 

you know, it’s something that touches everyone’s heart. I think 
a lot of us in here are parents, aunts and uncles, and to hear of a 
young person taking their life is, you know, there is nothing 
more tragic, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we looked at total health care funding for mental health, 
about 275 million plus. Of course when we tie in the addictions 
funding which is broken out of that, it’s an additional I think 45 
or so million dollars. But then if we look at the other ministries 
that actually provide mental health supports, whether it’s the ag 
mental health line or many others, Mr. Speaker, about 85 
million extra dollars. So I know a lot of that isn’t included in 
other provinces, but when we look at that, our spending is pretty 
significant. And of course the Minister of Health has talked 
about it at length and so have the Premier and Deputy Premier 
and others, that we’re going to continually strive to hit that 7 
per cent target. And we will continue to work towards that goal, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, something that’s close to my heart, remote presence 
technology, we’re going to continue to support that through our 
health authority, implement not only Telehealth, but of course 
the nurse robots. The health in your hands, the doc in a box, so 
to speak, is a very effective piece of technology that works 
amazingly well, and look at expanding that into every area we 
can to continue to support health care, but also rural and remote 
health care where it’s actually the most effective. 
 
And of course something close to my heart is EMS [emergency 
medical services]. I’ve been doing a lot of work on the EMS 
file. I really want to thank Ron Dufresne who formerly was . . . 
I think he owned Moose Jaw ambulance services. He went to I 
think the ministry for a bit. He did a lot of work at air 
ambulance to get some challenges under control there and it’s 
just an amazingly operating and valuable service. But also he 
worked at STARS for five years and now he’s been doing a lot 
of work on the EMS file, and really effective there. So I’m very 
thankful for the work that he has done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems like I’m getting the hook here right away. 
You know, there’s one thing, much to the chagrin of my 
colleagues possibly, there’s one thing that I really want to touch 
on in health care, and it’s very personal, Mr. Speaker. I touched 
on it a bit, but over the last year and a half I was diagnosed, 
about a year and a half ago, I was diagnosed with colorectal 
cancer. And I want to thank the members on this side of the 
House, the Premier, former premier, this Premier, and again so 
many people that did offer so much support. 
 
But I really want to thank specifically the people in the health 
care system for my personal experience. And why that is, is I 
didn’t want to get any special treatment in the system. I was 
really impressed with the primary health care system at home, 
getting in for diagnostic imaging. I was triaged and got in for 
diagnostic imaging. You know, where some would think it’s too 
long, but I understand the system. You get triaged, you get in, 
and of course that was done in a timely manner. 
 
But the work that was done through the Cancer Agency, I just 
can’t say enough about the great work that they did there. Mr. 
Speaker, quite often I would be in to work early in the morning, 
and I would throw off my jacket and my tie when I knew I had 
about 15 minutes to get to the Allan Blair Cancer Centre, and so 



April 11, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3763 

they had no idea who I was. So it was over time, asking 
questions and building a relationship with them . . . It took 
about four weeks for them to figure out that I was the Minister 
of Rural and Remote Health, which was very interesting to see 
how great the care was without them knowing anything, just 
how they treat all the patients. And it really gave me a true 
appreciation for them. 
 
But also, you know, once they found out who I was and what I 
represented, some of the quite honest conversations I had, 
whether it was around continuous improvement or some of the 
other things, Mr. Speaker. But it really encouraged me as to 
how they were accepting of a lot of these practices. They 
realized a lot of the improvements, but I was also willing to 
listen to some of the challenges that they had. So that was a 
very eye-opening experience. 
 
And of course being the Minister of Rural Health, getting my 
surgery back home in Yorkton, very appreciative of all the 
health care professionals there. And again, I’m going to wrap 
this up. But just so appreciative of all those medical 
professionals that did give such great service. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that, thank you very much for your time. 
I thank my colleagues for enduring my long-winded speeches. I 
will be supporting the main motion, seconded by the member 
for Canora-Pelly. I will not be supporting the amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise into the budget debate that we’re having in 2018 
and the budget that we have before us. 
 
Before I start, I do also want to add my condolences and prayers 
and thoughts with the community of Humboldt. This tragedy 
that happened last Friday afternoon is one that will stay with us 
for a long, long time. And of course we have just learned of 
another death today, of the trainer I believe. And our thoughts 
and prayers go to her family as well. 
 
So we all stand with Humboldt and the struggle they have, that 
they will have, and their families. And I know the funerals will 
be tough, and our thoughts and prayers as well with the MLA 
from Humboldt who I know is deeply committed to her 
community. And so I think all of us are of the same mind of 
that. 
 
I want to talk specifically about some of my concerns with this 
budget. Of course yesterday was the government’s best day to 
put forward its platform of how it sees the budget will be for the 
year. And of course as it plays out over the course of the year, 
we see reality set in that the hopes and aspirations of the 
government, whether they are accurately planned or are they 
accurate at all. 
 
[16:45] 
 
I have to say, and I know my colleague from Nutana, I have to 
say that I thought her speech and her comments, her 
commentary on the budget, have been spot on. She has really 
raised a number of deep concerns that we have. And the 
question of the title, On Track — on track to where? And the 

metaphor that we’re like a train, a set of cars that are on some 
siding somewhere waiting for something to happen. We may be 
on track, but this government has provided no leadership, no 
vision, no imagination for the families and people of the 
province in terms of having hope for the future here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We see a government that’s caught deep into rhetoric, and we 
saw that today. We saw some of the language and rhetoric that 
this government is using to defend their position. And it’s 
alarming, Mr. Speaker, it’s deeply alarming. Here we have 
people, families paying more than ever in their taxes. PST, 
more than ever, some $667 a year that they will be paying, 
whether it’s in child’s clothing, restaurant meals, you name it, 
that they didn’t pay before. And why? Because of this 
government’s mismanagement, when over the course of the past 
decade they had record revenues, revenues that were unheard 
of, the kind of money that was coming in and was mismanaged 
by this government. 
 
And of course the debt that we have, and of course we talked 
about the higher power rates than we’ve ever had before. Mr. 
Speaker, we have more people living in poverty or near poverty 
than ever before. This is not a good situation. We’re a have 
province, and we are proud of that, but in fact we spend more 
than ever on social assistance and this is something that we 
should not take lightly. 
 
We have the lowest minimum wage in the country now. The 
Maritimes province are above us. Newfoundland’s above us, 
and why is that? And this is a tough situation for many people. 
And then we’re hearing of the cut to the rental supplement, and 
I’ll talk more about that. 
 
But I thought the critic for Finance raised a very important point 
that this government seems to be . . . that they just don’t hear or 
they can’t fathom that we have a situation where we have 
mortgage arrears now are three times the national average. So 
that’s our province, Saskatchewan. Mortgage arrears are three 
times the national average. That means people are paying . . . 
living paycheque to paycheque in a very vulnerable 
circumstance. And this government did not seem at all 
interested in providing any kind of relief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve raised this point on a bill that we have before 
us, the land contracts bill. And it talked about the notice of 
foreclosures and they were the highest in 1990-91 with 1,900 
people having been served their notice of foreclosure on their 
homes. The lowest was in 2008 where it had come down to 428. 
We know the 2012 records are 688, and that’s nearly a jump of 
a quarter, of a third. That’s a huge jump to go from 428 to 688 
in four short years. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the irony today was we asked for in written 
questions the number of notice of foreclosures for the years 
since 2012 to 2018. That answer was ordered. This government 
knows the answer to that question but won’t share that answer. 
This is a government that came to power saying they’d be 
transparent and accountable. We would like to know how many 
people are facing foreclosures this year, how many faced them 
last year. But this government won’t come clean and tell us 
what actually were the number of foreclosures. So we hear you 
have a very different kind of province than what these folks are 



3764 Saskatchewan Hansard April 11, 2018 

portraying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the member, our 
Finance critic, when she talked a little bit about the general debt 
and the fact when they seem immune or . . . It was interesting 
that the Minister of Finance thinks that we’re okay with the debt 
levels we’re incurring here, that we’re nearly doubling our debt 
and it will even be higher. But if they used the same reporting 
protocols as they used last year, the deficit this year would be 
much greater. It would be actually closer to $750 million. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we are paying $655 million in debt servicing. 
What we could do with that kind of money. What we could do 
with that kind of money. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, and I know the Minister of the Economy 
doesn’t like it when we raise a question about people getting to 
work. There’s 7,800 lost jobs last year, and he will pull out 
numbers. We see the kind of action that’s happening in Alberta 
or British Columbia, but it’s not happening here in 
Saskatchewan. We have the slowest job growth, but all we get 
is rhetoric. So, Mr. Speaker, we have some real concerns about 
that. 
 
Now in many ways last year’s budget can be a bit of shock and 
awe. People were just shocked at the gall of the government, at 
what they were doing, particularly to the municipalities, people 
on social assistance. And in some ways this is an improvement. 
But we know that concept of shock and awe, and people go, oh, 
well we should be thankful this year that it wasn’t as bad as last 
year. But people deserve more. They deserve leadership. They 
deserve hope. They deserve inspiration. These are difficult 
times for people living in Saskatchewan. 
 
And we saw this particularly in education where the education 
budget was cut by $54 million. They restored $30 million and 
they expect to be thanked for that, Mr. Speaker. They expect to 
be thanked for that. And as my colleague from Fairview said, 
you know, it’s like a pickpocket taking money out of your 
pocket and then giving you half back and expecting you to say 
thanks. Well we’re shocked by that. We’re shocked by that. 
This government should actually be restoring funding. Our 
classrooms are full. They’re getting more and more kids in the 
classrooms, and what do we have? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I said that we’re really concerned about this 
kind of thing. I do want to say, I want to talk just briefly about 
the minister’s comments on mental health, and we’re 
appreciative. We’re glad to see that there’s over $11 million 
being spent on that, but we understand some $9 million are 
coming this year from the federal government. And as my 
colleague from Riversdale actually asked the question, what 
about the $1.5 million that was earmarked for last year? Is that 
part of the 11 million? And so . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It 
is part of the 11 million. Okay. 
 
So actually we are hoping, we are hoping . . . We are calling the 
government to get, not only to meet the 7 per cent target, if I 
understand what the minister was talking about. What we need 
to be at, 9 per cent or even more, you know. And I appreciate 
the minister, and I think this is important. He talked about other 
avenues and other departments that can help, for example, in 
agriculture, their rural helpline. That’s very good, very 
important. 

But I know that we see in labour, we see PTSD [post-traumatic 
stress disorder] as a big issue. And people are not getting served 
with PTSD, especially those . . . And my colleague from 
Riversdale has raised this in terms of volunteers who are asked 
to serve in emergency medical situations, and they don’t have 
. . . they’re not covered by Workers’ Comp and they don’t have 
a plan. But they are suffering from PTSD because they are the 
front lines, first responders. And so we need to do more about 
that. 
 
And I just want to talk briefly about the rental housing 
supplement. I’ve talked . . . I think I’ve talked every year for 12, 
14 years on this topic. And I was surprised that I didn’t hear 
more about what I have said. I want to see, Mr. Speaker, more 
research into this. This is a good program and if it’s working 
with the federal program, fair enough. But the federal program, 
we understand, doesn’t kick in until 2020. There’s an 18-month 
gap, 18-month gap. People will wonder about what’s 
happening. The Minister of Social Services says that people are 
grandfathered in now. That’s kind of true. The question is, what 
happens if you’re on it now and you move? We understand 
you’re off. You’re not grandfathered in, so that you are done. 
And so people are now going to be frozen into the places where 
they’re at. And this is an issue. 
 
You know $50 million is a lot to pay in rental supplements. And 
if you look back in the comments I’ve said . . . And I expect to 
hear somebody throw this back to me. I’ve said, is there a way 
we could have spent that $50 million better in terms of building 
social housing, building seniors’ housing, building affordable 
housing. 
 
The minister talked about Sask Housing vacancies. Fair enough. 
But we know this government has raised the rents in Sask 
Housing apartments and that’s probably why people aren’t in 
those places because they’ve chosen to look in the private 
market, or they might know somebody, or they may be 
doubling up or tripling up. So this is a real, real issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to put this on the record. The Minister of 
Justice has not raised the funding for the Human Rights 
Commission now in several years. And I see that there is a lot 
of attention, a lot of people going to the Human Rights 
Commission, and I know this is a problem. And this is one that 
even a minor . . . And now, you know, I don’t want the 
members to say I’m asking for $2.5 billion here — they’ll get 
their pencils real sharp — but some sort of increase to recognize 
how important this service is, some sort of increase. 
 
We saw a cut to the Energy Star program and it will save some 
$2.8 million, you know. So there are . . . You do different things 
with different programs. And so you save $2.8 million there. 
And I get now it’s normalized. People are looking for Energy 
Star programs, and that’s fair enough. But we still need to make 
sure our core programs like Human Rights Commission are 
being funded fairly. 
 
I just want to talk briefly in my new critic role. I’m . . . 
[inaudible] . . . coming back is a bit of recycling. I’m now back 
into the environmental cycle. But the carbon tax, he made a big 
point about that, no carbon tax, fair enough. But I found it really 
odd, really odd, they are not providing any money at all for 
their court case — zero money for that. 



April 11, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3765 

Now we’ve been down this road before when they decided to 
go to the Supreme Court over labour issues and I had several 
questions about, where’s the money for that. And they said, 
well the ministry officials can do it off the side of their desk. 
And I got in a lot of trouble for saying something like that. 
Because they said it was a priority. Well if it’s a priority, why is 
it not reflected in the budget? Well they’re all just there to do 
their work. I don’t know if that really flies. And we saw what 
happened with the labour court case in Ottawa and how well we 
did there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is so ironic that we have, on one hand, those 
folks . . . And the minister will get up and talk about the 
resilience plan and what’s happening there and how important 
that is. And there’s some really good parts in there, and I have 
to say that I’m looking forward to seeing how that unfolds. 
There’s some good work in terms of the agricultural 
contributions, all of that. But at the same time, they’ve cut the 
people I assume will be doing the actual research by some 18 
per cent. And that unit has been cut, I understand, some 80 per 
cent since 2012. So how is there any credibility on this file? 
 
The Premier got up and was talking about planting trees today. 
Reforestation is now down to zero. It’s completely cut. So the 
only guy who’s planting trees is the Premier. And so . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, there you go. There you go. 
They must have been fact checking. They’re not helping at all. 
Well there you go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to put on the record about some things 
around recycling. And this is from the Retail Council of Canada 
and they were not happy about the new environmental handling 
charges. Now I know, I understand how this money recycles 
through the GRF [General Revenue Fund] and then comes back 
to Sarcan, but the fees are very high. 
 
Now this is a case . . . Now the Minister of Justice, he wants to 
get up, but he’s eating up my clock and he’ll get his time when 
he gets his time. What do they say? Without consultation. Have 
we heard that before with this group? Without consultation. 
And without notice, the province of Saskatchewan announced 
on Friday, March 23rd, 2018 the new environmental handling 
charges. This is industry talking about this. This is industry 
talking about this. So we’ll have lots of questions about this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to put on record that there’s a lot of 
problems on this budget and I have a lot of concerns. I’ll be 
supporting the amendment for sure. But I want to make sure I 
get on record, I still have the biggest problem with big money. 
And all you have to do is follow the money to know where this 
budget is actually coming from. This is all about big money, 
Mr. Speaker. I support the amendment. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 5 p.m., this Assembly stands 
adjourned until 10 a.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

MOTIONS 
 Extension of Question Period 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3733 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker ................................................................................................................................................................... 3733, 3735 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3733 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3734 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3734 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3734 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3734 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3734 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3735 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3735 
  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3735 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3735 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3735 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3735 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Francis ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3735 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3735 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3736 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3736 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3736 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3736 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3737 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Day of Pink 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3737 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3738 
 Canadian Cancer Society Daffodil Campaign 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3737 
 Asbestos Awareness Week 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3737 
 Constituent Recognized for Canola Production 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3738 
 Pasquia Snow Goers Volunteer Time to Maintain Trails 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3738 
 Anniversary of the Battle of Vimy Ridge 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3739 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Provincial Budget and Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3739 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3739 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3740 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3740 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3741 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3741 
 Saskatchewan Employment Numbers 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3742 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3742 
 Changes to Rental Housing Supplement 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3742 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3743 
 Funding for Municipalities 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3743 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3743 
 Supports for Northerners 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3744 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3744 
 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3744 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3744 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3749 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3752 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3754 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3756 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3758 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3763 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


