


















































March 28, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 36A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 28, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3651 
 March 28, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Imputing Motives 
 
The Speaker: — I have a statement about the line of questions 
asked by the member for Saskatoon Centre during yesterday’s 
question period. The questions raised the spectre of a 
connection between the private interest of a minister, political 
donations, conflict of interest, and the motivation of cabinet 
with the possible sale of government real estate. 
 
“These are serious questions about the motivations of the Sask 
Party government’s front bench,” the member said before going 
on to link that statement with a statement referring to the 
Minister of Central Services’ personal stake in commercial real 
estate and the political donations he took from real estate 
companies. 
 
Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules & Forms, 6th Edition, 
paragraph 484(3), states in part, and I quote, “. . . a Member 
will not be permitted by the Speaker . . . to impute to any 
Member or Members unworthy motives . . .” To impute is to 
assign by inference. After reviewing the Hansard verbatim, it is 
clear to me that the questions insinuated that the minister and 
cabinet might be motivated by personal interest and political 
donations. 
 
The House of Commons Procedure and Practice, 3rd Edition, 
page 619, states the following: “Remarks which question . . . 
integrity, honesty or character are not in order.” 
 
I want to point out what Speaker Hagel said in this Assembly 
about question period on May 27th, 1998: “. . . it is never, ever 
appropriate that, engaging in political cut and thrust of debate in 
this Assembly, that members would draw into question the 
character of another member.” 
 
The questions asked yesterday by the member for Saskatoon 
Centre imputed unworthy motives on the part of the minister 
and questioned the character of cabinet ministers to make 
honourable decisions. For this reason, I rule the questions to be 
out of order. 
 
I repeat what I said yesterday. This House is honourable. I 
expect you to have your questions with that frame in mind, 
please. 
 
I now ask the member from Saskatoon Centre to rise, withdraw, 
and apologize for the statements he made in question period 
yesterday. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise and withdraw and 
apologize.  
 
Thank you. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, I wish to introduce 23 grade 8 
students in the west gallery from the Redvers School. With 
them today are their teachers, Kayla Henderson and Robert 
Duncan, as well as parent chaperones Todd Garnier, Cheryl 
Ohnander, and Murray Aulie. Earlier this morning we did a 
mock parliament here on the floor of the Assembly with the 
school, and they did a very good job, Mr. Speaker. And Mr. 
Speaker ably chaired that meeting. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Ice cream. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — It’s already too late. They ate. I would 
ask members to welcome them to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Where are you from? I forgot where you’re 
from. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Regina Rochdale. 
 
The Speaker: — Rochdale. I recognize the member for Regina 
Rochdale. Sorry.  
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to rise in the House today and acknowledge some very 
hard-working, community-minded individuals seated in your 
gallery. We have the organization committee from Spring Free 
from Racism here today. And it’s wonderful to see the kind of 
work they do within the community to ensure that people 
understand that everyone is welcome and everyone is to be 
treated equally in the province of Saskatchewan.  
 
And so with great pleasure we welcome Barb and her 
committee here today that work so diligently to ensure that 
there’s a very successful event on Spring Free from Racism. 
Thank you so much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to join the 
member from Regina Rochdale in welcoming these members of 
the Spring Free from Racism steering committee to your 
gallery. With us today we have Barb Dedi, Brian Sklar, Kai 
Hutchence, Tamara Bailey, Jackie Krasko, and I also see 
Shelley up there. 
 
As the member opposite noted, they work hard year round. In 
fact I’m sure they’re already working towards planning the 20th 
anniversary of their very successful Spring Free from Racism 
event, Mr. Speaker. And I would invite all members to join me 
in welcoming them to their Assembly and thanking them for 
their hard work over the last 19 years. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 



3652 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2018 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Shellbrook, 
Leask, Parkside, and Debden. I do present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition calling on the government to stop the cuts to 
our children’s classrooms. Mr. Speaker, those who have signed 
this petition today wish to draw our attention to the following: 
to the fact that this government saw fit to take an additional $67 
million, Mr. Speaker, in additional property tax into the GRF 
[General Revenue Fund] but at the same time cut $54 million 
from our children’s classrooms.  
 
As might be reasonably expected, Mr. Speaker, these cuts have 
had a devastating impact to classrooms all across this province, 
including cuts to programs, to staffing cuts, as well as the loss 
of busing for kindergartners and the loss of specialized pre-K 
[pre-kindergarten] programs for kids with special needs, 
including autism and those who are deaf and hard of hearing. 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and stop making 
families, teachers, and everyone who works to support our 
education system pay the price for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
raise the petition I’ve been raising for several weeks in this 
House, and that is to get big money out of Saskatchewan 
politics. 
 
And we know that citizens here in the province of 
Saskatchewan want to bring to our attention the following: that 
Saskatchewan’s outdated election Act allows corporations, 
unions, and individuals, even those outside this province, to 
make unlimited donations to our province’s political parties; 
and that the people of Saskatchewan deserve to live in a fair 
province where all voices are equal and money can’t influence 
politics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know the past Sask Party leader, Brad Wall, 
was the only premier in this country who collected a special 
cash bonus paid for by taxpayer-funded subsidies and a portion 
of millions of donations they collected from corporations and 

big-money donors, including from those outside this province. 
And over 10 years, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has 
received $12.61 million in corporate donations, and of that, 
$2.87 million come from companies outside of Saskatchewan. 
And we know that Saskatchewan politics belong to 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government and the provinces of 
Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, and British Columbia now have 
moved to limit this influence and level the playing field by 
banning corporate and union donations to political parties, 
leaving us virtually the last wild west of Canada when it comes 
to political donations. Mr. Speaker, I would like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign finance laws, 
to end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 
from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 
on individual donations. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
calling for critical workplace supports for survivors of domestic 
violence. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the highest rates of 
intimate partner violence amongst all of the provinces, and we 
all know that we must do so much more to protect survivors of 
domestic violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for many of those who experience domestic 
violence, the violence follows them to their workplace. And all 
these petitioners are asking for is that five paid days leave and 
up to 17 weeks of unpaid days leave should be made available 
to workers who are survivors of domestic violence. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Saskatchewan Party Government to pass legislation to 
ensure critical supports in the workplace, including 
reasonable accommodation and paid and unpaid leave for 
survivors of domestic violence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today come 
from Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again to present a petition calling on the Sask Party government 
to appoint a seniors’ advocate. The petitioners point out that the 
concerns of seniors have not been a priority for the Sask Party 
government. They talk about cuts to services for seniors 
increasing in this last budget, Mr. Speaker, increasing long-term 
care fees, cutting the hearing aid plan, cutting podiatry services, 
raising the cost for seniors to purchase medication, taking many 



March 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3653 

people off the seniors’ drug plan. 
 
The petitioners point out that this province does not have a 
legislated minimum quality of care standard, Mr. Speaker, in 
long-term care, even with continued reports — we’ve had an 
Ombudsman’s report; we had an auditor’s report just as of last 
June actually on this issue; and CEO [chief executive officer] 
reports year after year, including this last February — that point 
out that staffing levels is a real issue in long-term care that puts 
at risk safety, quality of life, and dignity for seniors, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The petitioners point out that other provinces have a seniors’ 
advocate and it’s worked very well for them to ensure seniors 
have the supports they need and they deserve; and that a 
seniors’ advocate here would provide vital support for seniors 
and their families across the province in a proactive way. I’d 
like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to immediately appoint a seniors’ 
advocate to ensure the rights of seniors are upheld and that 
all seniors across the province have the supports they need 
and deserve. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
Saskatoon and Regina. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Spring Free from Racism Event 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Sunday I was 
pleased to join yourself and the member for Regina Douglas 
Park in attending the 19th annual Spring Free from Racism 
event here in Regina. Spring Free from Racism celebrates and 
brings awareness to the International Day for the Elimination of 
Racial Discrimination by hosting a family day full of cultural 
entertainment, food, and displays. This year the event was again 
held at the Italian Club and, Mr. Speaker, it was a packed 
house. In fact there were more wonderful things to do and eat 
than ever before. And, Mr. Speaker, those who have attended 
the event in the past know that that’s quite a feat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Spring Free from Racism has grown significantly 
over the years. Nineteen years ago the event was held in a very 
small room and there were about 150 people in attendance. On 
Sunday over 5,000 people attended, and there were hundreds of 
performers. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, much of the population growth we have seen in 
our province in recent years comes from international 
immigration. People from around the world not only bring their 
skills and talents to our province, they bring their languages, 
cultures, and unique identities. Our diversity is what makes this 
province strong, and it’s events like this that bring our 
community together to celebrate and learn from each other that 
are so important. 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the president of Spring Free 
from Racism, Barb Dedi, and her whole team for putting on 
such a fantastic event. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Reopening of Variety Place 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On January 
16th I was pleased to join community members, dignitaries, and 
day program participants in Outlook to celebrate the grand 
reopening of the Variety Place day program building in 
Outlook. The house was packed with people who came out to 
see the new look of the building. 
 
I’m proud our government invested in this renovation so that 
this program could be more accessible and inclusive for all of 
its clients. Our government provided $350,000 to cover 
renovation costs to do the improvements. 
 
Variety Place is an integral part of the community. It delivers 
supports and services for people with disabilities. This is just 
one of the many examples that show our government is 
prioritizing people with disabilities. It is great to see the 
changes and upgrades made to many areas of the building, such 
as the improved entry, the locker area, the addition of a sensory 
room, and a redesigned, more functional kitchen. The clients are 
also looking forward to spring, when they can have barbecues 
and get-togethers on the new cement patio. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Variety Place for 
their commitment to the people of this province. They play a 
vital role in supporting the Saskatchewan disability strategy as 
we work together to improve the lives of people experiencing 
disabilities. I would ask that all members join me in 
congratulating Variety Place, its employees, volunteers, and 
community partners in their new beginning. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Provincial Curling Championship 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this month I had the 
pleasure of welcoming curlers from across the province to the 
2018 CURLSASK joint masters provincial championship. I was 
invited to speak at the opening luncheon at the CN Curling Club 
in Saskatoon. This was a particularly special opportunity for 
me, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve been a member of the CN Curling 
Club for a number of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our club hosted over 20 men’s and women’s 
masters teams from across the province. I want to congratulate 
men’s champions, Team Hritzuk. The Saskatoon-based team 
moves on to the national championships after they posted a 
perfect record at provincials. In the final end, Hritzuk edged out 
Peter Thiele of Regina with a 7-6 win in extra ends. Team 
Hritzuk last won the national championship in 2014. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a repeat performance for Team Syrota. 
With a record of six wins and just one loss, Delores Syrota and 
her Wadena team are once again provincial masters champions. 
They were able to defeat five-time champion Merle Kopach in 



3654 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2018 

Sunday’s final with a 7-5 margin, capturing the title for a 
second straight year. Both teams will represent Saskatchewan in 
April at the national championship held in British Columbia. 
 
I ask that all members join me in congratulating Team Hritzuk 
and Team Syrota for their wins, and a special thank you to the 
CN Curling Club and all of the organizers and volunteers who 
made this a success. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

Young Athlete Recognized 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
recognize an inspiring young man from Rosetown, my home 
community. Mr. Speaker, Kendall McFaull is a fifth-year 
defenceman and four-year captain of the University of 
Saskatchewan Huskies hockey team. In his U Sports career, 
Kendall represented Canada at the FISU [International 
University Sports Federation] world Universiade winter games 
and the U Sports all-stars twice against Team Canada’s junior 
national team. On top of this, Mr. Speaker, he maintains an 88 
per cent average in mechanical engineering. Needless to say, 
this is an incredibly impressive achievement. 
 
Recently Kendall was recognized nationally when he received 
the U Sports Randy Gregg Award for student athlete 
community service. That’s right, Mr. Speaker. In addition to 
hockey and school, Kendall still makes time to volunteer with 
organizations such as the Saskatoon Minor Hockey Association 
and Recess Guardians, which help to keep kids active. 
 
The following is a quote from a recent StarPhoenix news 
article. Dave Adolph, Kendall’s head coach, had this to say: 
 

Kendall has routinely been considered one of the top 
defencemen in university hockey, has continually been 
strong academically, and gives back to the community. He 
is an impeccably mature young man who will continue to 
reach great heights and follows in a long line of former 
Huskies who have won this award before him. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the community of Rosetown is incredibly 
appreciative and respects this young man. Mr. Speaker, I ask 
that all members join me in recognizing Kendall McFaull for 
his outstanding work as a leader and a role model. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

SustainTech 2018 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday I 
brought greetings to the SustainTech 2018 conference in 
Saskatoon. This conference was hosted by the Saskatchewan 
Environmental Industry and Managers Association, or SEIMA, 
highlighting the latest environmental practices and 
technologies. 
 
Over 180 participants, including regulators, industry 
professionals, and consultants, came together to discuss 
advancements in oil and gas, mining, agriculture, and other 

sectors important to our province. The conference also included 
regulatory sessions with officials from the Ministry of the 
Environment. The sessions discussed the ministry’s compliance 
audit program, decommissioning and reclamation guidelines for 
industrial waste works, and regulatory approaches to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government’s new Prairie Resilience: A 
Made-in-Saskatchewan Climate Change Strategy was also 
discussed in these sessions. Those in attendance showed their 
support and commitment to this plan and are looking forward to 
this government moving forward with real and measurable 
climate change action. 
 
I’d like to thank those involved in the industry for continually 
being at the forefront of results-based regulation, environmental 
protection, and innovation in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members in this Assembly please 
join me in congratulating SEIMA and everyone involved in 
SustainTech 2018 for making it such a successful event. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Kindersley. 
 

Hockey Team Captures League and Provincial Title 
 
Mr. Francis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise in 
the House today to acknowledge the accomplishments of some 
of my younger constituents. The West Central AA Bantam 
Wheat King hockey team is comprised of 14- and 15-year-old 
players from the communities of Dodsland, Eston, Fiske, 
Kindersley, Luseland, Macklin, Rosetown, and Unity. They 
compete in the highest calibre bantam hockey available, a 
league boasting of 22 teams province wide. 
 
I’m proud to report that the Wheat Kings have captured the 
league and provincial title this past weekend, a very impressive 
feat, and a first for this team in its young history. They defeated 
teams from Northeast, Prince Albert, Saskatoon, and Regina in 
their playoff run. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this accomplishment is especially meaningful for 
myself as I have had the pleasure of not only watching most of 
these boys but also having the opportunity to coach some of 
them as recently as last year, including Kindersley products 
Brody Gasmo, Tylin and Ethan Hilbig, and Logan Linklater. As 
a west central resident, volunteer, and coach, I take pride in not 
only knowing these young athletes but also witnessing and 
sharing in the successes their hard work and dedication have 
provided. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the team is now off to Kamloops, BC [British 
Columbia] this weekend to vie for a medal in the Western 
Canadian AAA Bantam Challenge. On behalf of everyone in 
this Assembly, including the Minister of Health and the 
member from Cut Knife-Turtleford who are also represented, I 
would like to congratulate all those affiliated with the team on 
their successes so far and wish them all the best in Kamloops. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 



March 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3655 

Opposition Claims Regarding Conflict of Interest 
 
Ms. Carr: — Mr. Speaker, different leader, same old NDP 
[New Democratic Party]. Same old drive-by smear tactics based 
on nothing but innuendo and complete lack of understanding of 
how government works. 
 
Yesterday the NDP falsely suggested that the Minister of 
Central Services may have some sort of conflict because — get 
this — Central Services owns property and the minister owns 
property. Mr. Speaker, that is not a conflict. 
 
But in the interest of transparency, here are some other 
ministers that may be in a conflict according to the NDP: The 
Minister of Agriculture owns a farm. The SaskTel minister 
owns a phone. The Finance minister has money. The Minister 
of Advanced Education went to university. And the Minister of 
Education went to school, albeit a long time ago. The Energy 
minister uses gas in her car. And here is one the NDP may not 
be aware of: before he was elected, the Minister of Parks, 
Culture and Sport actually made a living playing a sport. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course none of these are conflicts, but it just 
shows the ridiculous NDP phony allegations are. The fact is we 
have conflict of interest laws; we have a Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner. We have a conflict of interest and interest 
disclosure requirements that ensure ministers are not in a 
conflict of interest. The only real conflict is between what the 
NDP leader says about his new style of politics and what he 
actually does, which is the same old NDP smear tactics. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Conflict of Interest Legislation 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And we have been 
talking about doing politics differently. The integrity of our 
democracy, Mr. Speaker, it depends on the people of 
Saskatchewan having full trust in the actions of the members in 
this House. And there can be no doubt that the members work 
for the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
People are watching this House with great concern, Mr. 
Speaker, and it is indeed time that we do politics differently. 
That means all of us having the courage to shine a light on our 
own actions so that we can uphold this place as you describe, 
Mr. Speaker, as a place of honour. It’s about re-establishing the 
trust and confidence of the people of Saskatchewan in our 
legislature. It’s not about any one member, Mr. Speaker; it’s 
that we can’t afford even the appearance of conflict of interest. 
 
My question is, Mr. Speaker, my question is: will this new 
Premier do what his predecessor would not? Will he strengthen 
The Conflict of Interest Act to ensure that the commissioner can, 
and I will quote the Deputy Premier, “. . . investigate any future 
potential conflicts of interest more thoroughly and resolve them 
more quickly”? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

And with respect to conflict of interest in this House, Mr. 
Speaker, there has been numerous advances made over the last 
number of years with the agreement of both sides of the House, 
Mr. Speaker, in the formation of the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner. 
 
And let’s be very clear, Mr. Speaker. It is not a conflict of 
interest for a minister to have business interests, or own a 
property in the province of Saskatchewan, nor should it be a 
deterrent for individuals to own a business or own property to 
run for public office, Mr. Speaker. It’s only a conflict . . . We 
need to be clear. It’s only a conflict if the minister uses his or 
her position to advance those interests, Mr. Speaker. There are 
numerous laws. There are numerous processes and public 
disclosure statements, requirements that prevent just that, Mr. 
Speaker. There is no conflict of interest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So if the member of the opposition or any member of the 
opposition feels it’s their purview and they have any specific 
accusation to make, they should have the courage to make that 
accusation, Mr. Speaker, instead of throwing out these gutless 
drive-by smears that they’re getting so good at. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, thank you, Mr. Speaker. The reality 
is that we have a lot of people in this province looking at this 
House and asking serious questions. Whether that’s about 
conflict of interest or the political donations that do come in, the 
donations that come in from corporations out of this province, 
corporations with no limits on what they can give. 
 
And so I’ve heard a lot from these members across the way. 
I’ve heard a lot from these members across the way that they 
were interested in this conversation of doing politics differently, 
Mr. Speaker. And I want to know, Mr. Speaker, are they serious 
about that? Do they want to do politics differently? Do they 
want to join us, get rid of corporate and union donations? Will 
they support our bill to get rid of big money in politics? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, we have strong 
conflict of interest rules in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. As I said, we have strong electoral finance rules here 
in the province of Saskatchewan as well, Mr. Speaker, that are 
mirrored in many of the leadership . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. We went through something at the 
start of proceedings today. Things have started to go off the 
rails. Okay, let’s get back on. Right? Respectful dialogue, 
please. 
 
I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, we have conflict of 
interest legislation here in the province of Saskatchewan. It’s 
conflict of interest legislation that was worked on, Mr. Speaker, 
by a multi-party committee, Mr. Speaker, here in the province 
of Saskatchewan. There’s conflict of interest legislation and 
disclosure that each and every member in this House discloses 



3656 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2018 

to the Conflict of Interest Commissioner each and every year, 
Mr. Speaker, so that we’re not left with debating conflict of 
interest on the floor of this Assembly or out in the rotunda, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And again I reiterate, Mr. Speaker, if there’s members opposite 
that have an issue, have an issue that they feel that someone in 
this House, Mr. Speaker, has violated in any way that conflict 
of interest, Mr. Speaker, they should bring that issue to the 
commissioner, Mr. Speaker, in the way that it’s expected, Mr. 
Speaker. This . . . 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Could the members from Nutana and 
Saskatoon Centre please come to order. Mr. Premier, very 
quickly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to doing politics 
differently in this House, Mr. Speaker, as the very first question 
that was asked in this Assembly this session, Mr. Speaker, we 
agreed to work with the members opposite on any opportunity 
that we could, within the confines of the budget, Mr. Speaker. I 
think I specified a specific opportunity where we would be 
willing to do that, Mr. Speaker. But it’s very concerning as I 
have seen it slip in such a short period of time, Mr. Speaker. 
Reminds me of just over 10 years ago. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Support for Community-Based Organizations 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Shortly after being 
elected by his party, the Premier spoke to reporters and he said 
that he understood and recognized the need to address the root 
causes underlying crime and other challenges in our 
communities, Mr. Speaker, and these are encouraging and 
welcoming words. And I think there’s a lot of opportunity for 
us to find some common ground there. 
 
And the Premier will also know, Mr. Speaker, that many of the 
most vital programs that help vulnerable people are delivered 
by our community-based organizations, or CBOs. We can’t 
underestimate the value of the work that these organizations do 
nor the importance of secure and stable funding for their 
success. In last year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, the government 
threatened to cut 10 per cent of the funding of those health 
CBOs [community-based organization] in particular. 
 
In his first budget, will the Premier back up his words on the 
importance of addressing upstream causes? And will he provide 
certainty for our CBO sector, make sure that their funding will 
not be cut in the year ahead? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 
the member opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, I think that 
the member was here when we brought the budget down last 
year, Mr. Speaker. We increased our budget by 6.9 per cent, in 
challenging fiscal times, to all of our income assistance, Mr. 
Speaker. We have increased income assistance over $250 
million and, Mr. Speaker, we have also worked with all of our 

community-based organizations to make sure that they are able 
to meet the needs of our clients, Mr. Speaker. The 
community-based organizations across Saskatchewan are doing 
some great work, Mr. Speaker, and we’re happy to partner with 
them. Is there more work to be done? Absolutely, Mr. Speaker, 
and we look forward to that work to come. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, in the last budget we saw 
significant cuts to the most vulnerable people in this province, 
and you just can’t, you just can’t balance your budget, Mr. 
Speaker, on the backs of the most vulnerable. It’s not kind. It’s 
not fair. And it doesn’t work. 
 
Now I’m no ophthalmologist, Mr. Speaker, but this government 
clearly has a vision problem. They can’t see far enough ahead to 
recognize how much smart, upstream investments would grow 
our economy and reduce costs in Health, in Justice, in Social 
Services. This has been the big problem, Mr. Speaker, from day 
one. This is a government that has a short-sighted approach that 
costs us big in the long term. 
 
So my question is: in this year’s budget, are we going to see the 
Sask Party try the same trick? Are we going to again see them 
try to cut their way out of a downturn and stifle the economy, or 
will they invest in people and stimulate the economy as it’s 
much needed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member 
opposite is very well aware that the budget’s coming down on 
April 10th, and I would encourage him to wait for that. 
 
But what I can talk about, a few numbers that may be 
pre-budget, Mr. Speaker, is the 112,000 people that we took off 
the tax rolls. I’m sure the member opposite would recognize 
that that is a significant investment in the most vulnerable in our 
province. Mr. Speaker, we’ve also had 1,000 child care spaces 
that we’ve created, Mr. Speaker. We’ve also seen . . . Some 
other fabulous numbers that we have, Mr. Speaker, is our $250 
million that we’ve absolutely invested in our community-based 
organizations. And another number is three times, three times 
we’ve increased the seniors’ income plan, Mr. Speaker, and I 
think that’s very significant. 
 
Another number that the member might want to remember is 
the 440 wait-list that they created while they were in 
government in the 16 years and didn’t seem to care that much 
about the people for vulnerable. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Shelter for Youth in Swift Current and Area 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this week Swift Current 
received news that there would be no provincial funding for 
Dories House, a community initiative that provides housing and 
supports for youth at risk. Just today, Mr. Speaker, the 
community of Swift Current came together and rallied to fight 
for Dories House, to fight for what’s right, and to fight for 



March 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3657 

supporting homeless youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are teenage kids that are now being forced 
back into homelessness, forced out of opportunities, forced out 
of stability and out of hope, pushed into unsafe living 
conditions. Mr. Speaker, will the Sask Party do the right thing 
and commit funding to Dories House to provide shelter for 
homeless teenagers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 
the member for the question. One of the first things that I did 
after being appointed into the Ministry of Social Services was 
go out on a tour across the province, Mr. Speaker. I did have the 
opportunity in mid-September to meet with Dories House, the 
board, and the media of Swift Current to talk about this. 
 
When Dories House was created, Mr. Speaker, there was no 
promise or commitment from the government on any funding, 
Mr. Speaker. This was supposed to be a community-based 
organization funded by the community, Mr. Speaker. They have 
approached us for funding, Mr. Speaker, and our analysis of the 
situation in southwestern Saskatchewan is that we do have 
adequate support for the youth there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But again if there is somebody out there in the Swift Current 
area that is seeing somebody that is vulnerable, I wish that they 
could contact our office so we can help that individual. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the beds are full. All 
Dories House wanted was $350,000 for eight beds, Mr. 
Speaker. Homelessness itself costs Canadians, costs 
Saskatchewan people $50,000 per year per person. Last year 
Dories House served 25 young people, kept them out of 
homelessness. That saves over $1.2 million in one year alone. 
 
Yet the Sask Party says that the coverage, as we heard here 
today from the minister, is adequate in Swift Current. They 
think that only four overnight beds only for men in Swift 
Current is adequate. Teenage girls are being left out in the cold 
all throughout the Southwest. This is anything but adequate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Swift Current saw a problem; they stepped up 
with a solution. Now it’s time for this government to step up 
also. Will the Sask Party do the right thing, support this smart 
investment in order to prevent homelessness, save money and 
likely lives, and make sure that there’s opportunities for young 
people, young girls throughout the Southwest and in Swift 
Current? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thanks again, Mr. Speaker. I think 
our commitment to people in the province hard to house is 
outstanding, Mr. Speaker. I think we’ve done a great job. 
We’ve invested over $780 million to repair or rebuild 16,000 
units. The NDP record, Mr. Speaker, for seven years was they 
only did 909 units. That’s a dismal shame, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, when we looked at Dories House, we considered 
all options. We worked with local community-based 
organizations that were in place. Our analysis of that area is, not 
much has changed as far as youth at risk, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again as I say, if there is somebody in the Swift Current area or 
in any area of the province, Mr. Speaker, that needs some help, 
I would encourage them to contact Social Services so we can 
provide either those services outside the house, or we could also 
provide those wrap-around services in home, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Funding for Autism Supports 
 
Ms. Chartier: — At-risk youth aren’t the only ones left waiting 
as the result of the Sask Party’s inaction. Families can’t count 
on the Sask Party. Two years ago they were promised 
much-needed supports for autism that still haven’t materialized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, joining us today in the Assembly is Christina 
Noubarian. Christina and her husband have three young 
children and their two youngest are on the autism spectrum. 
Christina, like so many other parents, believes it is completely 
unacceptable that this government is making them face this 
burden alone. 
 
To the minister: does he recognize there’s a spectrum of needs 
for children with autism? And can he guarantee that children 
who require more intervention and support actually get the help 
that they need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
take this issue very seriously, as the member knows, as all 
members know, that this was part of the platform in the last 
election, to move towards individualized funding for children 
with autism, Mr. Speaker, $4,000 per child. Mr. Speaker, it was 
deferred during last year’s budget but, at that time, it was 
clearly indicated it would be moving forward in the upcoming 
budget. It was part of the Throne Speech last fall, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly, you know, I welcome our guests here. If they’d like 
to meet after session, I’d be happy to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again to reiterate, we do take this very seriously. 
We will be moving forward with the promised commitments in 
the upcoming budget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — This government has a pattern of breaking 
promises, Mr. Speaker. Two years, families have been waiting. 
They’ve been waiting a lot longer than that, but this government 
committed to it two years ago. 
 
They slash funding to education and then they take credit for 
restoring just a portion of what they cut. There’s a serious gap 
in services for lower functioning children with autism over the 



3658 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2018 

age of six. Mr. Speaker, in 2016 the Sask Party promised, in its 
election campaign, to introduce individualized funding, an 
improvement that other provinces are already offering. 
 
Christina’s family is having to choose between the basics and 
autism supports. Nearly two years later, that promise has not 
come to fruition and, according to Christina, the proposed plan 
will not come close to meeting the needs of families with 
autism. 
 
To the minister: when this government has already broken their 
promise and is lagging behind other jurisdictions, why is 
Saskatchewan’s ultimate goal to offer less than other provinces 
in individualized funding? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I clearly 
indicated in the earlier answer, we are moving forward with our 
commitment. It was deferred one year, Mr. Speaker. We take 
this issue extremely seriously, that’s why it was part of the 
platform commitment, Mr. Speaker. It’s $4,000 per child under 
six. And in the out years, we intend to increase those amounts, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But if the member opposite wants to talk about underfunding, I 
think she should do a little bit of history, Mr. Speaker. Prior to 
us forming government, the entire funding for all autism 
services and supports, Mr. Speaker, was $500,000 when the 
members opposite . . . A number of them were in government at 
the time, Mr. Speaker. Today, Mr. Speaker, it’s just about $8 
million. Mr. Speaker, we take this very seriously. We will move 
forward with this in the next budget, Mr. Speaker, as 
committed. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Management of Global Transportation Hub 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, for more than two years we’ve 
seen headline after headline about how Saskatchewan taxpayers 
are having to pay for the Sask Party’s mismanagement at the 
GTH [Global Transportation Hub]. The most recent headline 
reads, “Regina city councillor says taxpayers getting shafted by 
the GTH for millions of dollars.” That city councillor went on 
to say, “The Global Transportation Hub, by all accounts, is a 
financial disaster.” 
 
Now for several years the city of Regina has been waiting for a 
deal with the GTH that the Sask Party has failed to deliver. 
Payments for water, wastewater, utilities, drainage, and fire 
have not been made. Now in December the GTH agreed to pay 
$3.3 million for these services as an initial payment, but the city 
of Regina has yet to see that money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now given this financial disaster, how on earth is the GTH 
going to be able to pay its outstanding obligation of $3.3 
million to the city of Regina? And where’s the money to pay 
this going forward? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have no intention of 
negotiating with a single councillor on the city of Regina city 
council. We have no intention of negotiating matters through 
the opposition. We have no intention of debating those matters 
on the floor of the Assembly or in the rotunda. 
 
We have officials that are working with the city of Regina. I 
understand those discussions are ongoing. Nobody’s come to us 
and asked us for a specific direction on anything. We’ll 
continue to let that process do it. But, Mr. Speaker, for the 
benefit of the members opposite, I think we should look 
carefully at what takes place every day at the Global 
Transportation Hub. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the time of construction, there were 1,800 
people working there full time. There was $485 million in 
private investment. Now on an ongoing basis there are 860 
full-time jobs . . . Well the member opposite shouts, Loblaw. Of 
course it’s Loblaw. It’s the largest building by way of footprint 
in the province of Saskatchewan. It is a million square feet and 
it’s got 860 people working at it. If the members have more 
questions, I’ve got more figures for them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Ms. Sproule: — I’ve got questions, all right, but I’m looking 
for answers, Mr. Speaker. Let’s remind ourselves of all the 
ways they’ve used public money to prop up the GTH. And the 
member from Moose Jaw should be listening to this as well. 
$700,000 in cash from the province just to get things started. 
Land acquisition costs, Mr. Speaker, $14 million. And don’t 
forget another $11 million on lawsuits on every piece of land 
purchased at the GTH except, of course, the infamous east 
parcels. There’s no lawsuits there, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. 
Marquart was paid well above the inflated appraisal value. 
 
Now $25 million from SaskPower, taxpayers’ dollars, to buy a 
plot of land four years ago that now sits empty. What’s next? 
Are they going to move SaskEnergy’s head office out there? 
Are they going to force SaskTel to take up shop at the GTH? 
The minister himself admitted yesterday that the GTH footprint 
was an overreach. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, people work hard. They pay their taxes. So 
how can this minister justify this overreach to the hard-working 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the people in our 
province do work hard. They work hard for their money. And 
every day at the Global Transportation Hub, 860 of them show 
up for work; 860 of them receive a paycheque; 860 of those 
people likely live in the city of Regina. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
pleased that those people are continuing to work each and every 
day. And it’s through the benefits provided by the Global 
Transportation Hub that those people have good, on-time jobs. 
Mr. Speaker, each and every week at the Global Transportation 
Hub, 4,800 trucks come and go, bringing in groceries, bringing 
in other food. Where is it consumed? In the city of Regina, Mr. 



March 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3659 

Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the GTH was originally developed with 1,800 
acres. Seven hundred acres have been sold and, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s about 1,100 acres left to sell. As with any real estate 
development, you pay for your expenses first. You pay for the 
cost of land, the cost of roads, the cost of putting in utilities. 
That’s what’s taking place out there. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
economy is slow right now, sales are slow, but it will rebound. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Cost of Power for Saskatchewan People 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday the SaskPower minister said that, and I quote, 
“Power rates are the exact same regardless of where you live in 
the province of Saskatchewan.” The facts just don’t back that 
up, and the minister should know better. The rate in the North 
for power is 14 cents per kilowatt hour. The farm rate for 
electricity is as low as five and a half cents per kilowatt hour, 
less than half of what we pay in the North. And northerners are 
also forced to pay a higher basic monthly charge than people 
living in the South. 
 
Why is Sask Party forcing northerners to pick up the tab for 
their carbon capture project with massive power bills? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I think the 
member opposite knows that by class the rates are the same. So 
if we’re comparing residential rates to residential rates, the rates 
are the same. If you’re in a different customer class, then your 
rate would be different, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But with respect to what the member opposite is asking about, 
he was asking about residential rates. What I said yesterday is 
that the rates are the same, and that would be true across the 
province. If you’re a residential rate customer, your rate is the 
same across the province. I think he’s been here for a few years; 
he might know that already. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, people are struggling to pay 
their SaskPower bills because of that government’s carbon 
capture scheme. Northerners are paying more for your 
mismanagement, and it shouldn’t have to be that way, Mr. 
Speaker. It is time for fairness. We can all agree that someone 
living on a remote farm and someone living in a remote 
community, northern community, should have to pay a similar 
rate. But the rate most rural residents pay in the South is less 
than what we pay in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the extra costs are compliments of the Sask Party 
and their carbon capture tax. How can the Saskatchewan Party 
explain this additional cost to all of our power bills, and this 
total lack of fairness? And when can northerners expect to see 
lower power bills? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s interesting that that member would advocate for 
this policy that would see different rates for residential 
customers depending on where they live in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t recall that that was the position of the NDP 
when that member was a member of the cabinet of the 
Government of Saskatchewan for, I don’t know, how many 
years? A lot of years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to power rates in this province, we’re 
working hard to ensure that we have competitive rates, that we 
keep those rates low, Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell you what will not 
help those rates is adding a carbon tax, Mr. Speaker, which the 
members opposite and their new leader is advocating, that we 
have a carbon tax in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re not going to allow that to happen, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s why we’ve determined that we’re going to have 
our own plan, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to see us reduce our 
own emissions in our province without a carbon tax, Mr. 
Speaker. And that means that if the federal government is going 
to impose a carbon tax on this province, Mr. Speaker, that that 
is not, Mr. Speaker, that’s not some sort of crusade, a costly 
crusade as the Leader of the Opposition says. That’s the right 
thing to do for the province of Saskatchewan, and we hope the 
members opposite would get on board with that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Saskatchewan Employment Numbers 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, new numbers from Stats Canada 
today show that the Sask Party is continuing to fail 
Saskatchewan workers. There were 300 fewer people working 
in January compared to December, and 600 fewer compared to 
last January. Saskatchewan was one of only two provinces to 
see a decline in the number of people working. 
 
The thousands of people looking for work don’t want to hear 
more spin from the member from Meadow Lake. They want 
real action and to create good-paying jobs. What is the Sask 
Party’s plan to create more good jobs in this province? And 
when will the minister do his job so other people don’t lose 
theirs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister of trade and export 
development. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well the NDP might not want to hear 
the facts, Mr. Speaker, but here they are: Saskatchewan has the 
third-lowest unemployment rate in the entire country; 63,000 
new jobs have been created in this province over the course of 
the last 10 years, Mr. Speaker, which is the second-best job 
creation record in the entire country. 
 
We know what their job creation record was as well, Mr. 
Speaker, which was dead last. And, Mr. Speaker, if you want to 
see a prescription for disaster from the good doctor opposite, 
he’s put it forward. And what is that prescription, Mr. Speaker? 
A carbon tax, a job-killing carbon tax that he supports — Justin 
Trudeau’s plan to impose a job-killing carbon tax on this 
province, Mr. Speaker. He’s made it very clear that that’s 



3660 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2018 

something that they support. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, what he actually called our opposition, 
our standing up for this province? A pointless crusade, Mr. 
Speaker. The people of this province are not going to forget his 
prescription which is that carbon tax, his calling this 
government’s decision to stand up for this province, his calling 
that a pointless crusade. Mr. Speaker, we will stand up for this 
province. This Premier will stand up for this province every 
single day of the week, even if he wants to wave the white flag. 
 
The Speaker: — Just before ministerial statements, the 
students of Redvers were involved in a mock parliament. I’m 
not sure whether or not this mirrored what they learned earlier. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 

Saskatchewan Signs Canadian Agricultural  
Partnership Agreement 

 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure today to recognize the signing of the new 
Canadian Agricultural Partnership agreement, or CAP, for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Through CAP, Canada and Saskatchewan will invest $388 
million over five years in strategic initiatives that will help 
farmers, ranchers, and agribusinesses continue to innovate, 
expand, and advance Saskatchewan as a world-class agri-food 
producer and supplier. 
 
This federal-provincial agricultural policy framework provides 
a strong suite of programs to take us from 2018 through 2023. 
We have worked closely with industry in the development of 
programs that align with the priorities of Saskatchewan’s 
agriculture industry. 
 
CAP programs focus on six key areas, including science, 
research, and innovation; risk management; value-added 
agriculture and agri-food processing; public trust; markets and 
trade; and environmental sustainability. The range of 
programming in CAP includes programs to support on-farm 
water projects and animal health, as well as programs to further 
develop value-added processing and build public trust. CAP 
also emphasizes research and technology transfer to ensure 
farmers and ranchers have the latest agronomic tools. Individual 
program details and applications will be made available in the 
coming weeks. 
 
Additionally, CAP provides business risk management 
programs, including crop insurance, AgriStability, AgriInvest, 
and western livestock price insurance to help farmers and 
ranchers manage risks such as weather and price volatility. 
 
The agriculture sector is an important and key contributor to our 
province’s diversified economy. Saskatchewan producers 
harvested nearly 35 million tonnes of crop last year and 
livestock cash receipts reached around the $2 billion mark. Our 
province exported over $13.5 billion worth of agricultural 
agri-food products to the world. Saskatchewan is an agriculture 
leader in Canada. CAP will build on the success of the previous 

agreement, Growing Forward 2, which has helped the 
agriculture industry grow and prosper over the last five years. 
 
I am pleased for Saskatchewan to officially sign CAP. The 
Canadian Agricultural Partnership will help position the 
industry for continued success for years to come. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to the 
minister for his comments and his statement. I just wanted to 
enter some comments on the record. Of course, this is a 
long-awaited framework agreement, as mentioned by the 
minister. The CAP agreement is the third iteration after 
Growing Forward 1 and Growing Forward 2, and is a five-year 
agreement that will see $3 billion nationally, but $388 million, 
as the minister noted, in strategic investment in the agriculture 
industry within the province. And of course this agreement is 
something that is much needed to support a very important 
industry within this province and across the nation. 
 
I had the good fortune yesterday to be up at the APAS 
[Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan] priority 
policy conference yesterday, and of course this was top of mind 
for folks there as well. We heard a lot of research and concerns 
around just the increasing volatility within agriculture and the 
need for these agreements to be updated, and that there’s 
constantly updating of information based on the conditions that 
our producers are experiencing, everything from increased 
volatility within weather patterns . . . We’ve seen increasing 
number of catastrophic weather events over the last little while, 
increasing rainfall amounts, and increasing drought amounts, 
Mr. Speaker, and sometimes in the same year. I heard from one 
producer who had put in both drought and flood claims in the 
same year. So of course our producers are dealing with this 
complexity on a daily basis, and it has very high stakes. 
 
One of the other things that producers are dealing with is just 
the increase in costs. We’ve seen of course high numbers of ag 
receipts, but the increase in those receipts hasn’t kept pace with 
the net farm income, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a concern that 
farmers have. It makes for a very stressful situation when you 
have hundreds of thousands and millions of dollars in on inputs, 
and increasing volatility with regard to the return that you might 
see on those investments. 
 
I know that there was a lot of work that went into GF1 
[Growing Forward 1] and GF2 [Growing Forward 2]. There 
were some outstanding concerns that were expressed, and I look 
forward to seeing the details of the risk management programs. 
 
One of the things that we heard yesterday was particularly 
around the AgriStability program, Mr. Speaker, and there was 
an inability to predict coverage, Mr. Speaker. Hopefully some 
of those things have been rectified within this new agreement. 
And also a need to ensure that the benefits are realized 
equitably across the types of farms, mixed farms, those ones 
that we heard perhaps didn’t see the same benefit, and that 
might be taking away from diversification. We also heard the 
need for equity, Mr. Speaker, in benefit for producers across the 
lifespan, so not only for those who are established farmers, but 
those who are new to farming and are looking to make this a 



March 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3661 

way of life for themselves and their families. So I do await 
some of the details there. 
 
[14:30] 
 
As much as things have changed, Mr. Speaker, there are a 
number of things that haven’t changed with regard to 
agriculture in this province: first of all, the importance of 
agriculture to our economy and the world-class product and the 
world-class producers that we have here in this province. And 
it’s heartening to hear this level of support for those producers. 
I hope that some of their concerns are reflected in this new 
agreement and that we have taken the opportunity to take this 
important program and improve it with input from those 
producers. 
 
So I thank the minister for his statement. And I look forward, as 
I know producers do, to looking at the finer details of the 
program and those risk management programs within the new 
CAP. Thank you. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice to report Bill No. 72, The Privacy Amendment Act, 2017 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 72, The 
Privacy Amendment Act, 2017 without amendment and that the 
bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 72 — The Privacy Amendment Act, 2017 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 72, The Privacy Amendment Act be now read the third time 
and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs 
 and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 75, The Electronic Communications Convention 
Implementation Act, a bilingual bill without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and the bill be now read 
the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 75 and 
that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 75 — The Electronic Communications Convention 
Implementation Act/Loi de mise en œuvre de la Convention 

sur les communications électroniques 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that the bill be now read a third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 75 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 



3662 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2018 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs  
and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 87, The Data Matching Agreements Act without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and the bill be now read 
the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 87 and 
that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 87 — The Data Matching Agreements Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the minister that Bill No. 
87 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 182 through 185. 
 
The Speaker: — 182 to 185 tabled. I recognize the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to question 186. 
 
The Speaker: — Question 186 ordered. I recognize the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 187 through 190. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 187 to 190 tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 121 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 121 — The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
enter the debate today on Bill No. 121, the cannabis control Act 
here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This bill is coming forward 
obviously to create a regulatory framework for legalized 
cannabis, stemming from the federal Liberals’ promise back in 
2015 to make cannabis legal. 
 
I think I want to start with that place, Mr. Speaker, going to the 
place . . . Cannabis will be legal in Canada here in just a few 
months, Mr. Speaker. And it’s just a few months out, and we’re 
debating that bill in a very short period of time here, Mr. 
Speaker. In my experience in this place, we usually have the 
opportunity, legislation is introduced in the fall, and there’s an 
opportunity to review it and then it’s usually passed in the 
spring. So this timeline is pretty tight, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is a government who has known since 2015 that this 
was coming, this was imminent, and you would have thought 
that they would have done much of the legwork by then, Mr. 
Speaker. So I think it’s important to note that we are the last 
province to bring legislation forward. So we’ve been delayed, 
which impacts people who are interested in this as a small 
business or as an opportunity. By the government not bringing 
their plan forward sooner, it leaves everybody in limbo on what 
the system is going to look like, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think too, I want to walk back to the fall, to October of 2017, 
and the government actually did an online survey trying to get 
Saskatchewan residents’ wishes around what they expect this 
framework to look like and how that should roll out here, Mr. 
Speaker. I know that back in October there were some concerns 



March 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3663 

flagged around people. I know the government points out when 
they released this survey that there were 34,681 respondents, 
and of those 26,199 were complete surveys. They point out that 
this is the highest response rate received for any Saskatchewan 
survey, and I suspect that’s the case because this is a whole new 
. . . This is a new bill. We’re charting brand new territory here, 
Mr. Speaker, and many people are engaged and interested to see 
what this is going to look like, Mr. Speaker. For Saskatchewan 
and for Canada, it’s a very different way of doing things. 
 
But just taking us back to that survey in the fall, I know that 
there were some concerns that people from outside of 
Saskatchewan could participate in the survey. There was some 
concern about privacy. I remember reading a news story about 
privacy. This is not in my wheelhouse, but in terms of the URL 
[universal resource locator] or when you submit a survey, 
apparently there were some issues that survey respondents 
could be in fact identified if the government wished. And I 
know some people flagged some concerns around that. 
 
The government has followed some of the recommendations or 
followed some of the wishes of people in Saskatchewan, but I 
think it’s important to point out — and I’ll get to that around 
what this bill will be proposing, Mr. Speaker — but it’s 
important to point out that one of the questions around the 
model of wholesale distribution and retail sales, one of the 
questions was asked, if retail stores are considered, who should 
sell retail cannabis? And actually 45 per cent of respondents, 
the highest number of people responding, thought that 
government-run retailers was the way to go, similar to SLGA 
[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] and alcohol right 
now. Thirty-seven per cent did also agree with small-business 
retailers, but 45 per cent thought that the government should 
have a role in retailing cannabis because we see the benefit 
actually through SLGA that’s accrued to the people of 
Saskatchewan in terms of the ability to make money to support 
things like health and education and highways and all the things 
that we value so much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the government has chosen not to go that route, Mr. Speaker, 
but that’s in complete opposition to what 45 per cent of 
Saskatchewan residents, the highest number of respondents 
actually wish, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As we walk through this bill, so we’ve talked about some of the 
concerns around it being delayed and not necessarily listening 
to all the things that people in Saskatchewan had wished for this 
new world, Mr. Speaker. But this Bill No. 121 in particular, so 
again it creates that regulatory framework. So what are some of 
the things that it does? 
 
So it prohibits consuming cannabis in public spaces, not 
dissimilar from smoking cigarettes, Mr. Speaker. So as per the 
wishes of 88 per cent of survey respondents, the rules for 
smoking cannabis in public spaces will match the rules for 
smoking cigarettes in public spaces. 
 
Possession of more than 30 grams and more than four plants 
will be prohibited, I believe. And for a minor under the age of 
19, it’s illegal to possess marijuana; 19 has been set as the legal 
age. And possession of more than 5 grams for a minor would 
result in a criminal charge, while smaller amounts would be 
handled through ticketing and seizure up to I believe $2,000, 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
That age of 19 is an interesting one. I don’t envy the 
government, but this is the role when you tackle . . . When you 
want to be in government, when you want to serve, you have to 
do the tough jobs, Mr. Speaker, and creating this regulatory 
framework is one of them. And coming to the right age at which 
cannabis should be consumed is one of those things. I know that 
they’ve chosen to take 19 as the legal age, matching it with 
alcohol, and we’re supportive of that position. 
 
I know that there are others. There’s the Canadian Medical 
Association I believe had recommended the age of 25. I know 
the Canadian Cancer Society had been vocal about this and had 
talked about the possibility of different ages. You didn’t 
necessarily . . . There are jurisdictions where age limits don’t 
match up for everything for which we have age limits, Mr. 
Speaker, but I understand that need to strike the balance 
between suppressing the black market, Mr. Speaker, and 
ensuring that cannabis won’t end up in the hands of young 
children. So I know that it’s been a difficult decision, but 19 
was the age that this government has come upon. 
 
Possession of cannabis in a vehicle is prohibited except when 
transporting it from the place it was obtained to the place it will 
be consumed. That’s an interesting one, Mr. Speaker, and that 
actually matches alcohol and firearms. I think a lot of people 
wouldn’t realize that, that that actually matches alcohol 
regulations. I know lots of people probably don’t realize that 
and will maybe run many errands with maybe their first stop is 
the liquor store, and they put their purchase in the trunk and go 
on to the next few places in their errand running. But that in fact 
is illegal, and this will be the same rule for cannabis. 
 
But in fact I’d argue it’s quite unenforceable. It is incredibly 
unenforceable. So I’m not sure the point of putting in place 
legislation that is for all intents and purposes unenforceable. 
But that is one of them. Cannabis in a vehicle is prohibited 
except when it’s going from the place that it was obtained to the 
place it will be consumed. 
 
They’ve established rules for retail stores selling cannabis in 
this. There were some interesting dos and don’ts actually, and 
some of these are in this bill and some of them are reflected in 
The Traffic Safety Act that will be amended. 
 
If you are a non-smoker and want to consume cannabis, you’ll 
have to wait until July 1st, 2019. On the one-year anniversary of 
cannabis legalization, edibles and concentrates will be 
legalized. 
 
[14:45] 
 
We can expect to see public education campaigns surrounding 
safe consumption of cannabis relating to issues such as 
impaired driving laws, health risks, addictions, and pregnancy. I 
think this piece around public education is really important. 
When I had the opportunity to sit on the Traffic Safety 
Committee, not only did we talk about the importance of 
legislation, but legislation is not as effective unless people 
know what the legislation is and what the legislation and what 
the consequences of breaking that legislation are, and what 
public harms can come to people from consuming certain 



3664 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2018 

products. So that public education campaign will be very 
important. 
 
I’m interested to see actually from which ministry or where that 
public education support will come. Will it come from Health? 
Because it is very much a health issue, Mr. Speaker, or there is 
no doubt there is a health component to this. Or will it come 
from SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] around 
impaired driving? That is a good question, Mr. Speaker, and we 
don’t know that. 
 
I think the one piece . . . And this isn’t in this legislation, but 
it’s in the legislation that goes along with this around smoking 
cannabis and driving. So do not smoke cannabis and drive. The 
province has taken a zero tolerance approach for all ages and all 
experience levels. 
 
But this is a little tricky here, because I know that, again from 
my experience on the Traffic Safety Committee — and granted, 
it’s been a while, but I had understood that there was no really 
reliable test for THC [tetrahydrocannabinol] in the human body, 
Mr. Speaker. There wasn’t a roadside test that you could do. 
And actually, a quick look on Wikipedia, which I would be the 
first to say shouldn’t be the be-all and end-all for your source 
for information, but just on Wikipedia, one can find quickly, 
cannabis drug testing. So I’d like to quote it: 
 

Cannabis drug testing describes various drug test 
methodologies for the use of cannabis in medicine, sport, 
and law. Cannabis use is highly detectable and can be 
detected by urinalysis, hair analysis, as well as saliva tests 
for days or weeks. 
 
Unlike alcohol, for which impairment can be reasonably 
measured using a breathalyser (and confirmed with a blood 
alcohol content measurement), valid detection for cannabis 
is time-consuming, and tests cannot determine an 
approximate degree of impairment. The lack of suitable 
tests and agreed-upon intoxication levels is an issue in the 
legality of cannabis debate, especially regarding 
intoxicated driving. 
 
The concentrations obtained from such analyses can often 
be helpful in distinguishing active use from passive 
exposure, elapsed time since use, and extent or duration of 
use. 

 
So I do know the one thing that people use, or one thing that 
police use to detect impaired driving, whether it’s other drugs, 
Mr. Speaker — it might be prescription drugs that someone has 
taken a large quantity or in fact cannabis — is drug recognition 
experts. And I know in 2013, when we had the traffic safety 
advisory committee, we learned that Saskatchewan had a very 
low number of drug recognition experts. And I would argue that 
we’re going to need a heck of a lot of them come legalization, 
so I don’t know where that’s going to fall. 
 
I know when we figure out the taxation regime, I know that the 
feds will be giving the provinces 75 per cent of taxation, but I 
know the province has yet to announce how that’s going to all 
roll out. And I know that the Justice minister has said that the 
province isn’t going to revenue share that revenue with the 

cities, the cannabis revenue, from what I recall reading, Mr. 
Speaker. And that is a bit of an issue. 
 
The minister, in the same comment, said that it’s the province 
who’s still responsible for training drug recognition experts. But 
if the province is responsible, I’m interested in committee to 
know how many have been trained, how many do we currently 
have, and what kind of expense has the minister budgeted for to 
get us up to speed to fully utilize drug recognition experts on 
the road, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know some of the other issues here that my colleague has, one 
of my colleagues has mentioned, the Justice critic actually, she 
points out that the retail sales, the permits actually that are 
going to be sold will . . . The application process closes on 
April 10th which is the same day we learn about the taxation 
and what that’s going to look like. And that puts businesses at a 
disadvantage. She’s also flagged that she’s concerned that this 
will shut out, the process will shut out small local businesses, 
Mr. Speaker, and have a . . . because of the process and the 
business, the financial stress test may rule out some smaller 
businesses in favour of large corporations that have much more 
capital. So that is a concern that she’s flagged as well, and we’ll 
be watching that. 
 
But I do know that once we get to committee, there will be 
many questions on all of this. This is an important bill. This is a 
huge change in landscape here in Canada and here in 
Saskatchewan. And undoubtedly, I suspect that this bill may be 
before us again in the coming year or couple of years as we see 
what it looks like and how things might need to change. Well 
hopefully maybe there’ll be some good questions . . . Well I 
know there’ll be good questions in committee but maybe there’s 
an opportunity for amendment. I don’t know what that will look 
like, but our critic, when we get to committee, will ask many 
questions. And with that I would like to move to adjourn debate 
on Bill 121, the cannabis control Act. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 121, The Cannabis 
Control (Saskatchewan) Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 122 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 122 — The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2018/Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi 
intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to wade 
into the discussion on Bill No. 122 which is a companion Act to 
Bill No. 121 to which I just spoke. It makes consequential 
amendments to other pieces of legislation so they align with the 



March 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3665 

changes that we see in Bill No. 121. Obviously it’s important to 
ensure when you make changes or create a new piece of 
legislation that affects other pieces, that all needs to be tied 
together and connected. 
 
So I think that the one change that is happening here in The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997, it’s amended to, 
section 12 is repealed and the following is substituted, where 
with respect to responsibilities: 
 

The authority is responsible for the regulation and control 
of: 
 

any other matter that the Lieutenant Governor in Council 
may assign to the authority. 

 
It’s also always good to see that when a new piece of 
legislation, a brand new piece of legislation, comes out that it’s 
in its bilingual form and we have that as well with Bill No. 122 
as well. But with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 122. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 122, the cannabis control 
consequential amendments Act, 2018. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 95 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 95 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise this afternoon to join in the debate around Bill No. 95. Mr. 
Speaker, this bill largely repeals several different pieces of 
legislation and also proposes some housekeeping amendments 
on others. For example, The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 2003 is being repealed. The new amending 
legislation to The Child and Family Services Act was actually 
introduced this session. Similarly for The Income Tax Act and 
The Penalties and Forfeitures Act. 
 
There’s also some Acts in this legislation, Mr. Speaker, which 
are being repealed directly like The Closing-out Sales Act, The 
Community Bonds Act, and The Home Energy Loan Act, Mr. 
Speaker. Also there’s a section of The Forest Resources 
Management Amendment Act that has a section repealed related 
to some public disclosure and some confidentiality 
requirements in the Act, Mr. Speaker. And we’re flagging this 
as something that needs some further dialogue around why this 
change was made and what the thought was when this decision 
was made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s also some housekeeping to clean up a 

section of The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act that was 
actually never proclaimed, Mr. Speaker. And I’m not too sure 
why that section was never proclaimed, what the purpose was 
for it originally, and why the change had occurred now that it’s 
been deemed unnecessary. Mr. Speaker, also the bill repeals a 
section of The Power Corporation Amendment Act that relates 
to some recourse for payments owed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the pieces of legislation that’s being 
repealed pursuant to this bill, that I know several of my 
colleagues have already weighed on and have highlighted, is the 
repeal of the Enterprise Saskatchewan bill, Mr. Speaker. A lot 
of my colleagues had some very, very eloquent things to say 
about this, Mr. Speaker. And this repeal is in section 6 of this 
bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
From what I understand, this was a pet project of our former 
premier and it’s a bit surprising to see it go, although the 
government stopped funding Enterprise Saskatchewan back in 
2013, which is before my time. But my colleagues tell me that 
this was touted as a really exciting step forward that ended up 
ultimately being a bit of a flop, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s interesting to see . . . From what I understand we’re 
one of the few jurisdictions that don’t fund local enterprise, and 
that’s to our detriment, Mr. Speaker. And seeing it go at this 
time is interesting and it sort of allows us the opportunity to 
take a step back and think about promises that were made or 
grand ideas that were presented back maybe a decade ago, and 
how far we’ve come and how the supposed mighty have fallen, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 2007 Bruce Johnstone wrote for the Leader-Post about 
Enterprise Saskatchewan, and when he did — I want to quote 
him directly — he said, “Enterprise Saskatchewan Premier-elect 
Brad Wall’s vision of how to manage the province’s economic 
development could be the biggest achievement of his 
administration, or it could be his biggest flop,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think now, looking back over a decade later, we know 
which of the two that bill was, because now we’re seeing it in 
this miscellaneous statutes repeal and amendment Act, Mr. 
Speaker, where apparently legislation goes to die, Mr. Speaker. 
Not to sound so morbid, but the truth is in the content, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There are many, like I said, many pieces of legislation that are 
being repealed. A few of them that I haven’t mentioned yet 
include The Home Energy Loan Act. That’s being repealed. The 
Lord’s Day (Saskatchewan) Act is being repealed. The 
Marriage Settlement Act, Mr. Speaker, is being repealed. The 
Parents’ Maintenance Act, Mr. Speaker, is being repealed. The 
Rural Electrification Act is being repealed. I believe that was an 
NDP government that first electrified and brought electricity to 
the rural locations in the province, and dare I say that it was 
Tommy Douglas who was premier at the time when that 
happened. I know the folks on the other side like to pretend that 
the province didn’t exist before 2007 and everybody was living 
in the dark ages prior to that, but we know the truth, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Similarly, Mr. Speaker, The Trading Stamp Act is also being 
repealed. And I don’t have much to add about that but I 



3666 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2018 

encourage, if anyone watching wants to learn more about that, 
they should review the wise comments made by the member 
from Prince Albert Northcote when she had the opportunity to 
add her 2 cents — or I don’t know how much a stamp is worth 
now, 51 cents — to this bill, Mr. Speaker. She spoke quite 
eloquently on trading stamps and I learned a lot. 
 
With that I am looking forward to having the opportunity to ask 
some questions at committee of the officials and, as always, 
spend some time with the Minister of Justice learning more 
about this bill and, like I said, having some questions answered. 
So at this time I’m prepared to allow Bill No. 95 to move to 
committee. 
 
[15:00] 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? The question before the Assembly is a motion by the 
minister that Bill No. 95 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 95, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017 be 
committed to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 97 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 97 — The 
Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise and join in the debate around Bill No. 97, An Act to amend 
The Arbitration Act. Mr. Speaker, this is a fairly interesting bill 
that I’m curious to ask some more questions about while we are 
at committee with the officials and the Minister of Justice. 
 
This bill does a few new things, Mr. Speaker. It sets out a 
definition for a “family arbitrator,” as well as “family law 
dispute.” Mr. Speaker, it retains an original definition of 
“arbitrator” and “arbitration agreement.” Mr. Speaker, it also 
adds a section that allows for arbitration for family disputes, 
and then also talks about the different pieces of legislation that 
would fall under what would constitute a family dispute, Mr. 
Speaker. 

I understand that this is a trend to divert family disputes to 
arbitration, Mr. Speaker, and I do know that there are some 
good folks who are doing family mediation services, both 
family mediators, family arbitrators, and lawyers who are 
especially qualified to do a dispute resolution in family law. 
But, Mr. Speaker, this mediation doesn’t work for everybody, 
especially in family law where you see a large amount of 
conflict. 
 
Oftentimes you’ll see both sides or one side not wanting to 
participate in the process. You can see there’s potential that 
there are some folks who have reached a stage in their 
relationship with the opposing party that they will never be able 
to mediate out an issue. For the folks where mediation is 
appropriate, where mediation can happen, then this is a step 
forward. 
 
And I do know we already have Family Matters which exists, 
and I’m hopeful that the committee will be prepared to provide 
me some details on the Family Matters project: how that’s 
going, how many people are accessing that service, and what 
the level of income is of the people who are accessing the 
service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I come from a background of working in the 
non-profit sector around access to legal services. I can tell you 
that my former employer, Pro Bono Law Saskatchewan, 
experiences the highest level of calls around the area of family 
law. And as someone who still volunteers in the area of family 
law at the Regina Free Legal Clinic, it’s what we see the most 
often. It can be a wait of several weeks before you’re able to see 
a lawyer.  
 
But when I do see clients and when I used to see clients before 
being elected, oftentimes the folks that would come through 
those doors would never be able to access a family law 
arbitrator. There are some folks who we are able to refer to 
mediation services, which have existed and continue to exist 
through the Dispute Resolution Office on a sliding scale for 
those who choose to use it. But there were many people who, 
for a variety of reasons, mediation was not an option for them 
and would never be an option for them. 
 
And I know that, Mr. Speaker, it was a change that happened 
well before my time, so I am used to having mandatory 
mediation for civil litigation matters. My hope — and based on 
what I’ve heard from other lawyers while I was doing 
consultation on this bill — is that mandatory mediation would 
not move to family law proceedings. There are some legitimate 
concerns around accessibility for folks. And there are some 
legitimate concerns around delay, Mr. Speaker, and the 
additional delay that any sort of mandatory mediation could 
impose. 
 
So I’m curious to know from the committee: questions around 
Family Matters, how that’s working; and consultation, what sort 
of consultation was done with respect to this bill; as well as 
whether or not there is any plan if this is going to be mandatory; 
and if this isn’t mandatory at this time, if there’s a desire to 
move it forward to mandatory mediation. 
 
There’s some times when, Mr. Speaker, mediation sounds good 
on paper. And it does because it means pulling things out of the 



March 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3667 

court process, making things more affordable for people. But 
there are some real reasons why it doesn’t work for everybody, 
Mr. Speaker, and we need to be cognizant of the fact that a 
one-size solution doesn’t fit all, Mr. Speaker, especially when 
we’re dealing with something as complicated and messy as 
family law disputes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there are several new positions, Mr. Speaker, that allow for a 
broader level of access to arbitration and to family law 
mediators. So I’m curious to know what sort of decision this is. 
I believe what this legislation is doing is adding a bit more 
power to an arbitrator. I’ve been using all of those words, but 
typically a mediator cannot reach a decision between the two 
parties unless both parties agree to it. Now that’s similar, Mr. 
Speaker, also to a pretrial where two parties go in front of a 
judge and the clients negotiate out a solution. 
 
An arbitrator has a little bit more power in terms of actually 
reaching a decision, so I’m curious to know how that’s going to 
look. I think that that would allow people to facilitate an 
arbitrator rather than a judge in Queen’s Bench, should they 
have a family law dispute that they can’t reach an agreement on, 
that they want someone to make that decision, and they want it 
to have some force, Mr. Speaker. So I’m curious to know what 
the judiciary, how does the judiciary feel about that, if they’ve 
welcomed this change or if they’re not happy with this change, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Who is going to be a part of this arbitration tribunal? And I 
understand that there is an appeal allowed, and it looks to me 
like it’s potentially being treated more like an administrative 
tribunal, Mr. Speaker. I’m curious to know if there’s other 
jurisdictions that have done something like this and what that 
looks like. We want to make sure that decisions that are being 
made are still being made in a way that respects the rule of law, 
and at the same time provides accessibility and access to the 
court systems, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as I said, I have a lot of questions about what this is going to 
look like, and the consultation that was done with respect to this 
bill. I’m looking forward to having the opportunity to ask those 
questions in committee. So as such, I’m ready to allow Bill No. 
97 to move to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? The question before the Assembly is a motion by the 
minister that Bill No. 97 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate the Bill No. 97, The 
Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 
be committed to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice. 

The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 98 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 98 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) 
Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative diverse (résolution des 
conflits familiaux) de 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise today to add my 2 cents into the debate around Bill No. 98, 
An Act to amend certain Statutes respecting Family Dispute 
Resolution. Mr. Speaker, this bill makes some changes to The 
Children’s Law Act, and I think that’s the only legislation that 
this is making changes to, Mr. Speaker. I’m just checking one 
more time. Oh, it is also making some changes to some other 
pieces of legislation like The Family Maintenance Act, Mr. 
Speaker, and The Queen’s Bench Act as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this again, similar to the last bill that I was talking 
about, deals around the area of family law and discusses some 
changes which provides more power to family arbitrators, and 
actually creates the definition of family arbitrator, Mr. Speaker. 
And it does some interesting things. And I want to point to, in 
particular, the amendment to The Children’s Law Act, which is 
section 2 of the bill, which repeals and replaces section 10 of 
The Children’s Law Act. And it says: 
 

(1) On an application by an applicant or a respondent 
pursuant to this Part or Part III or IV, the court, by order, 
may appoint a family mediator to mediate a matter that is: 
 

(a) dealt with in the application; and 
 
(b) in dispute between the parties. 
 

(2) No person shall be appointed as a family mediator 
without that person’s consent. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is an interesting change that I think is new. 
I’m not too sure if the courts have been asking for this, if this is 
something that they’re looking for. But the fact that the court 
may deem that if they’re hearing an application that they can 
now appoint a family mediator to mediate a matter, it’s 
interesting. Because still, when you’re going through the 
mediation process, it’s mediation, which means that the 
mediator can’t force an agreement between the two parties. The 
two parties have to reach an agreement that satisfies both of 
them. It’s not like a judge making an order and hearing both 
sides and then ultimately making an order, and then that’s what 
the order is whether you like it or not — which, you know, is 
beneficial in some ways; in other ways it can be a bit 
problematic. 
 
Mediation is fully available right now to anybody who is 
experiencing or may experience a family law dispute. The 
Dispute Resolution Office offers that service on a sliding scale, 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s right now a voluntary process. So I’m 



3668 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2018 

curious to know and I’m curious to hear the consultation that 
went into this provision and what the thought is about having a 
mediator ordered. I could see the benefit to that if both sides 
were requesting it, but then there wouldn’t be a need for an 
application because they could both go to the Dispute 
Resolution Office and ask to have a mediator resolve this issue. 
 
So if something is going to the court and somebody’s making 
an application for a mediator, I would assume that that means 
that the other side doesn’t necessarily want the issue mediated, 
which would make for a very difficult mediation session, Mr. 
Speaker. So I’m very interested to see how this works in other 
jurisdictions, if this is a provision that exists in other 
jurisdictions, and what level of success is received from this. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, it also creates another new section; it’s section 
10.1 and this deals with arbitration. And it says: 
 

(1) A family arbitrator may conduct an arbitration in 
relation to a matter that is in dispute between the parties 
and to which this Act applies. 
 
(2) Before initiating arbitration, a family arbitrator 
must . . . 

 
And then it talks about entering into a written agreement, which 
sounds sort of similar to what exists for family law lawyers who 
practise collaborative law — not exactly, but similar — in that 
everyone enters into a contract understanding the process. So 
I’m curious to know again if there is any part in the legislation 
that allows or that provides for any mandatory family 
arbitration, if a judge can order that that somebody can move to 
family arbitration, if whether or not, or despite receiving 
consent, or whether or not they have a consent from both parties 
or if it’s just one party who is requesting it, because it looks . . . 
I’m not entirely sure. 
 
There’s also a new provision as well called a “parenting 
coordination order,” and they provide a definition for parenting 
coordinator which is “. . . a person who is recognized by the 
minister of meeting the requirements prescribed in the 
regulations for parenting coordinators.” So I’m interested to see 
who that, what that person is, if that’s just another word for a 
mediator or if that’s a completely separate type of person, if that 
results in some different training that’s required for those 
people, or if it’s largely mediators who are going to be filling 
that role. 
 
It also has, like I said, section 21.2 that talks about parenting 
co-ordination orders and says that, “On an application by an 
applicant or a respondent pursuant to this section, the court may 
make a parenting coordination order.” 
 
And (2), “The court may specify in an order made pursuant to 
subsection (1) the amount of the parenting coordinator’s fees 
and expenses that each party is required to pay.” 
 
In subsection (3): 
 

The court may order that one party pay all of the parenting 
coordinator’s fees and expenses if the court is satisfied that 

payment would cause the other party serious financial 
hardship. 

 
And then moving on to section 21.3(1): 
 

A parenting coordinator may assist parties to a dispute 
respecting a matter to which this Act applies: 
 

(a) only if there is a parenting coordination agreement or 
order in place; and 

 
(b) only for the purpose of implementing an agreement 
or order respecting: 

 
parental responsibilities; 
 
access; or 
 
other matters prescribed in the regulations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I am curious to know . . . Mr. Speaker, there’s a 
lot of cases that come before family law judges that are dealing 
around parenting and access orders, and that can sometimes 
delay the court system. And you sometimes hear frustration 
from judges who are seeing individuals access the court to 
spend thousands of dollars to fight over what’s largely a 
difference between a few hours of access time, Mr. Speaker. So 
I’m guessing that the thought process here is that it would 
remove some of these things outside of the court system and 
into a more, I suppose, a more accessible system, and hopefully 
a more affordable system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
However I believe that this sort of thing already exists through 
mediation and through the dispute resolution office that has, 
like I said, mediators on a sliding scale that can provide this sort 
of thing. Unless the parent and co-ordinator is capable and has 
the power to make an order in the absence of having consensus 
between the two parties, Mr. Speaker, and if that’s the case then 
the hope is . . . Oh well then there’s some questions about 
training of the parent and co-ordinators and what the appeal 
process looks like should those decisions be . . . should an 
individual wish to appeal those decisions. Like I said before, 
mediation is great as long as both parties want to come to the 
table, and if that’s not the case then mediation goes sour very 
fast. 
 
So it’s very important that we are asking these questions and 
we’re making sure that we’re helping as many people as we can 
through this process, and that we’re helping not just those who 
are of middle, higher income. It’s those folks who are in the 
lower income brackets that we really need to make sure that 
we’re assisting. There’s many folks out there who can’t afford 
lawyers and don’t qualify for legal aid, and either choose not to 
make a family law application because of that or they try to 
struggle through the court process on their own. And it’s very 
difficult for them to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m worried about . . . You know, you can put these sorts 
of things in. I’m worried that it will not be able to help those 
who are in low income, those folks who are working two 
full-time jobs trying to make ends meet and can’t even get to 
the court process, let alone know that these are potential orders 
that could exist, Mr. Speaker. 



March 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3669 

And when I see the Minister of Justice just last Friday, in a 
press release attached to a whole bunch of other fine and tax 
increases, on a Friday afternoon, Mr. Speaker, include in those 
fine and tax increases . . . I think the language was something 
like, and other fines added to the court application process, 
which we still don’t know what that means. We still don’t know 
how much the fine increases are . . . or not the fine, the fee 
increases are, Mr. Speaker, for the filing fees that were 
increased, and what fees were increased. And it sounds like 
some new fees were added, Mr. Speaker, and we still don’t 
know again what those fees are. The Minister of Justice hasn’t 
provided us with any of that information. 
 
So I think the concerns we have around accessibility to courts is 
legitimate and this isn’t going to help anybody if they can’t 
afford to pay the filing fee for their petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was $200 to file a petition for divorce before, Mr. Speaker — 
I don’t know if that’s changed — $100 to file a petition for any 
other family matter that does not include divorce, Mr. Speaker. 
And then there’s filing fees for filing counterpetitions. There’s 
filing fees for making an application to the court, and we don’t 
know yet how much that is increased. 
 
But I’ve seen people choose to not file for a divorce because it’s 
too expensive. Because they’re trying to decide whether or not 
they can . . . They have to choose between whether or not they 
can feed their kids or whether they can file for divorce, and it 
causes some serious problems down the line when folks can’t 
access the family law courts in a timely manner. Unfortunately 
this isn’t going to help that and when the Sask Party keep 
jacking up fees and making it more difficult for people to access 
the court system, it doesn’t solve the problem and it doesn’t 
make the problem any easier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m curious to know some of those answers. It would be nice 
if the Minister of Justice could provide us with the details 
around these filing fees, which court fees were increased and 
what are the new court fees, Mr. Speaker, and for what types of 
applications, Mr. Speaker, because it is a problem. 
 
And you can apply to ask for having your filing fee waived. It’s 
not the easiest process in the world, Mr. Speaker. Typically you 
need someone to assist you through that process but some folks 
don’t even know that that is an option and then they just see the 
filing fee and they choose not to go through with the process, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if this government would properly fund Legal Aid so that 
more people could access legal aid for their family law disputes 
and maybe actually properly fund Legal Aid so we could 
include property division in the services that are covered by 
Legal Aid because right now it’s really difficult for an 
individual who has a low income, who qualifies for legal aid 
but then has property that needs to be dealt with. But then they 
can’t have their property division dealt with, which is a very 
complicated process, very confusing process. All of a sudden 
they’re unrepresented for like a third of whatever their legal 
issue is. It causes confusion in the courts. It causes confusion 
for the judges, and it causes confusion for the lawyers, Mr. 
Speaker. And frankly it causes confusion for the clients. 
 
So maybe when we’re looking at all these different ways we 

can increase access to justice and we can improve the justice 
system, let’s look at the program that exists now. Let’s look at 
legal aid. Let’s see how we can prop up Legal Aid and better 
fund it, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to see that happen for once, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So with that, I know I’ll have the opportunity to ask some more 
questions at committee. So at this time, I’m ready to move Bill 
No. 98 to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question for the Assembly is a motion by 
the minister that Bill No. 98 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Designate that Bill No. 98, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) 
Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to the Standing Committee 
on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice.  
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 107 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Makowsky that Bill No. 107 — The 
Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I often say there is 
very few days that go by in this legislature that I don’t learn 
something new. There’s oftentimes we get an opportunity to 
learn about all different kinds of things in this legislature, Mr. 
Speaker. And until I had to make remarks with regards to Bill 
107, I didn’t realize that Saskatchewan was going to have a new 
provincial fossil and that the Tyrannosaurus rex, it is going to 
receive the official honour of becoming Saskatchewan’s 
provincial fossil, Mr. Speaker. And I’m pretty happy about that; 
the giant, ferocious, meat-eating predator that the T. rex is. 
 
I have to admit that the Tyrannosaurus rex is one of my 
favourite dinosaurs. And I don’t know if it’s because it’s one of 
the few dinosaur’s names I could actually say and pronounce, or 
else if it’s one of the few dinosaurs I know how to imitate when 
I’m playing with my little grandsons. They love it when we 
play dinosaurs. 
 
But apparently I’m not alone in Saskatchewan by thinking the 
T. rex is a pretty amazing dinosaur. Apparently in 2016, the 
Royal Saskatchewan Museum held a contest for people to vote 



3670 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2018 

on what the province’s official fossil should be and the T. rex 
won handedly despite its very short arms. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there was 14,208 votes and there was six other 
contenders that the T. rex had to go against. And Scotty, the T. 
rex — they’ve affectionately named him Scotty — he had 4,923 
votes, so that was 35 per cent of the votes that were cast were 
for Scotty. 
 
The reason why Scotty has that name is there was . . . In 1991 
there was a discovery of the T. rex bones. He’s 
65-million-year-old fossil, and that was found in southwest 
Saskatchewan, and I believe that’s around Eastend, 
Saskatchewan. And because Scotty was found there they have 
the Scotty skeleton on display at the T.rex Discovery Centre in 
Eastend. So, Mr. Speaker, that’s another thing that I was not 
aware of. And when I think about dinosaurs I often think about 
Drumheller, but right here in our own province we have our 
own museums. And so I look forward to checking that out one 
day so that I could myself see Scotty the T. rex. 
 
Other provinces, Mr. Speaker, also have fossils as an emblem. 
Manitoba and Nova Scotia do, and there’s many other states 
that do in the United States. But none of them have the 
Tyrannosaurus rex, so this is a first for Saskatchewan. So it’s 
pretty exciting. 
 
[15:30] 
 
So Scotty’s going to join some of the other provincial emblems 
that we have in Saskatchewan which include the provincial bird 
which is the sharp-tailed grouse; provincial animal, it’s the 
white-tailed deer. The provincial tree is the paper birch, and the 
provincial sport is curling, and the provincial flower is the 
western red lily, and the provincial mineral is the potash. So 
that is pretty exciting.  
 
There’s not a lot within this bill, Mr. Speaker, just the changes 
indicating that we’re going to include the fossil and species 
known as the Tyrannosaurus rex and called T. rex, is the fossil 
emblem of Saskatchewan. That is the only addition to this bill. 
I’m really excited to hear what is going to be discussed within 
committee, and I know the critic will talk to the stakeholders 
and see how they feel about this. And there’ll be some 
interesting discussion around this. But one thing to note, Mr. 
Speaker, is that it might have taken 65 million years for the 
Tyrannosaurus rex to win a popularity contest, so let that be a 
lesson that it’s never too late to win a contest. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have much else to add with 
regards to my remarks on this bill so I’m going to let my other 
colleagues have a little bit more . . . They could add their own 
remarks to this bill. And I’m going to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 107, The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment 
Act.  
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 107. Pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 

Bill No. 110 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 110 — The 
Animal Protection Act, 2017 be now read a second time.]  
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre.  
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 
pleasure to join debate today, particularly given the topic at 
hand under this particular piece of legislation, Bill No. 110, The 
Animal Protection Act, 2017. Good to join debate on the heels 
of a stirring discussion of the provincial emblems Act by my 
colleague from P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote, with some good 
commentary from the member from Cannington. Certainly, we 
are, I think, united across this Assembly floor in terms of 
wondering, you know, if we had run him for the dinosaur 
contest, how would’ve he have finished against Scotty. I 
imagine he would have put up a pretty good fight, not just in 
terms of dinosaur credit, but I’ve also seen him around a steak, 
Mr. Speaker, and he can tear it up almost in T. rex fashion 
certainly. 
 
But anyway moving on to more germane matters under Bill No. 
110, The Animal Protection Act, 2017 . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Now I’m getting some encouragement from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. It’s hard to know if the ill wind is 
blowing out of Big Muddy these days. I’m not sure what’s 
happening over there, but ask him about . . . No, we’ll leave that 
be, Mr. Speaker. We’ll leave that for my planning and 
development speech, discussion of the taste of individuals in 
socks and whatnot. 
 
But all joking aside, Mr. Speaker, it’s good to see this particular 
piece of legislation come forward because certainly it’s not 
been too long ago that the Animal Defence League . . . The 
Animal Legal Defense Fund annual survey ranked laws across 
the country. They put this out in June 2016, Mr. Speaker, and 
not only were we beat in ranking by nine other provinces, Mr. 
Speaker, we also finished behind the Yukon. We’re 11th out of 
13 Canadian provinces and territorial jurisdictions. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, having listened to some of the debates 
that have taken place over the years in this Assembly, I well 
remember the member from Arm River having a pretty hefty 
interjection on this topic on earlier iterations of legislation. But 
I’d invite folks to look that up in Hansard if they want to find 
out more about that. But certainly, Mr. Speaker, this legislation 
comes forward at a good time. I’ll be very interested to see how 
Saskatchewan ranks after this legislation takes effect. 
 
Again you can’t do much worse than 11th out of 13, but 
sometimes this government tries; sometimes they’re always 
striving. I don’t know if the motto’s “you can always do worse” 
over there. But you know, and so whether this would move it up 
the rankings and then we could say finally we’re ahead of the 
Yukon in terms of animal protection. 
 
You know, Yukon, home of The Call of the Wild, stories that 
that involved, but . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’m getting 
egged on here by Cannington again. I’ll try to avoid it, Mr. 
Speaker. But anyway surely to goodness you’d think we’d 



March 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3671 

finish ahead of the Yukon. But whether . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . I don’t know what the member from 
Cannington’s saying, something about Diamond Tooth Gertie 
over there, but again I’ll resist the call of the wild, Mr. Speaker, 
and focus on the legislation. 
 
But in terms of where this legislation weighs out, in terms of the 
ranking of Saskatchewan as regards the protection of animals in 
this province, let’s take a look at the overview from the Animal 
Legal Defense Fund where they discuss what it takes to get to 
the bottom tier of provinces and territories, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They list a number of potential improvement, including better 
definitions; standards of basic care; broader range of 
protections; prohibitions related to animal fighting; recognition 
of psychological harm; narrower — more narrow I think would 
be the way to put that — but narrower activity, use-based 
exemptions; increased penalties for repeat offenders; mandatory 
terms of incarceration for certain offenders; mandatory fines; 
mental health evaluations and counselling; warrantless entry 
into dwellings under certain circumstances, animal protection 
officer may request person in dwelling to produce animal for 
inspection; mandatory seizure of mistreated animals. Again 
these are under the list of potential improvements that could be 
made in the legislative regime. 
 
Broader inspection powers for animal protection officers; 
possible on-site detention of seized animal. Officer may order 
owner to take action and provide care on site. Prejudgment 
forfeiture of animal if owner is unfit, animal may be harmed if 
returned. Mandatory forfeiture of animals and restrictions on 
future ownership or possession of animals upon conviction. 
Mandatory reporting of suspected animal cruelty by 
veterinarians and select non-animal-related agencies. Immunity 
for anyone who reports an animal in distress and assistance in 
the enforcement of animal protection legislation. And the duty 
of peace officers to assist in the enforcement of animal 
protection legislation. 
 
Now again, Mr. Speaker, that’s the list provided by the good 
folks at the Animal Legal Defense Fund. And in terms of 
fleshing out what it takes to make it to the 11th worst out of 13 
Canadian jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, in terms of animal 
protection . . . And again, this one has got us finishing behind 
the Yukon. I don’t know how the sled dog racing figures into 
that regime, Mr. Speaker. But however that goes, it’s apparently 
enough to get them finishing, mushing ahead of us, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so in terms of the legislation that’s been brought forward, 
what impact will this have on the ranking of Saskatchewan? 
And in all seriousness, Mr. Speaker, I recognize that there’s a 
broad array of interaction by humans and animals in the 
province of Saskatchewan, be it from, you know, the two cats 
that my wife and I are charged with the care of, Mr. Speaker — 
or rather, you know, taking the orders from — all the way out 
to, you know, whether you’ve got a hundred head of cattle to 
take care of out on the farm, and all points in between, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So in terms of the range of the impact of legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, and in terms of the way that this intersects with those 
service animals . . . I see the member from Battlefords is 

looking to get in on the . . . No, I’ve read the signals all wrong, 
Mr. Speaker. The member from Battlefords is withdrawing that 
request and will leave it lay, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But certainly in terms of the impact, the range of this 
legislation, there are some very valid concerns to be brought 
forward in terms of what is properly in the questions that come 
around — I don’t know — be it the member from Moosomin’s 
chicken coop that he runs with his daughter or how it impacts 
the question of service animals and raising animals for food, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Or you know, the deputy . . . No, I guess not deputy premier 
anymore. No, that turkey couldn’t fly. The fixation by the 
member from Saskatoon Southeast with turkeys, how that all 
sorts out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Too soon. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Too soon, too soon, I’m hearing from some 
quarters. But certainly, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the way that 
this all shakes out, again the list of potential improvements that 
have been listed by the Animal Legal Defense Fund and the 
changes that are brought forward in this legislation, let’s take a 
look at that, Mr. Speaker, see how it stacks up. 
 
Certainly several pieces of the old Act are maintained, such as 
the section on the protection of service animals, and again 
service animals being a relatively new, and by new I mean 
within the last 20 years — give you that, Mr. Speaker — in 
terms of their treatment under the law. It expands on the 
definition for an animal in distress, including conditions that 
would cause the animal extreme anxiety or impair the animal’s 
well-being over time. It expands animal care duties and what is 
expected of people who are responsible for animals. 
 
It changes the language from humane societies to animal 
protection agencies. And again, Mr. Speaker, as a long 
supporter and interested follower of the work of the Regina 
Humane Society, I’ll be interested to see that getting rolled out. 
And in terms of including limits on transporting animals who 
would suffer unduly during that transportation, the inclusion of 
a section for humane slaughter and euthanasia, the iteration of 
veterinarians having a duty to report when they have reasonable 
grounds to believe that someone isn’t properly caring for an 
animal or is perhaps causing them distress — taking that moral 
duty and prescribing it in law, Mr. Speaker — and where the 
Act also outlines the ways that animal protection officers can 
relieve an animal in distress, be it entering premises or vehicles, 
as well as the rules that apply to animal protection agencies 
across the province. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, a number of those initiatives line up well 
alongside the prescribed or the potential improvements that are 
enumerated by the folks at the Animal Legal Defense Fund. 
We’ll be interested to see how they take effect in law. I’ve seen 
elsewhere where this legislation has been characterized as 
giving more teeth to the animal protection regime in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of people that are very 
interested in the proper care of our animals in this province, and 
there are a lot of people that are very cognizant of that duty, that 



3672 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2018 

responsibility that comes to humans in terms of making sure 
that animals are well taken care of. And you know, from time to 
time the more sort of heart-wrenching and terrible 
circumstances that arise, Mr. Speaker, where animals are not 
properly cared for and are treated horribly and results in death 
and loss of life, Mr. Speaker, through improper care, through 
improper attention to the well-being of those animals, we’ll be 
very interested to see if this legislation can significantly reduce 
the reportage of those kinds of incidents. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, it’s again good to see legislation coming 
forward on this step. I think the Saskatchewan veterinarians’ 
association referred to this as a good step forward and certainly, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll not gainsay the good opinion of the 
veterinarians of this province. But again, Mr. Speaker, in terms 
of ranking 11th out of 13 in terms of the animal protection 
regime in this province, here’s hoping that we move the right 
way up that ranking and that this does in fact provide a 
workable and positive way forward in terms of animal 
protection in Saskatchewan. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, I know other of my colleagues will 
have more to say on this particular debate and probably much 
more wisely and more informed than I, and I look forward to 
that. But with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 110, The Animal Protection Act, 2017.  
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 110, The Animal 
Protection Act, 2017. Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 111 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doke that Bill No. 111 — The 
Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter into adjourned debates today and to speak about Bill 111, 
The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017. My 
colleague from P.A. Northcote was talking about provincial 
emblems probably about half an hour ago now, Mr. Speaker, 
and she mentioned the fact that our provincial mineral is potash. 
And I’m sort of guided by that idea as I address my remarks 
today on this particular piece of legislation. 
 
The minister provided background on why this bill was being 
introduced, or amended rather, when he gave his second reading 
speech. He provided some information about the history of this 
piece of legislation and when some of the changes have taken 
place. And for anyone who’s viewing at home, I’ll provide 
some background on what those details are as well. 

So this Act was first introduced in 1968 and the goal was to 
establish a tax-sharing system for municipal taxes on potash 
mines. So the intent here was to create a system where 
municipalities that are closest to the mines, and not necessarily 
only the municipality where the mine is located, would be able 
to benefit from municipal taxes that are collected from potash 
mines. 
 
To make sure that the taxes were redistributed properly among 
participating municipalities, the Act also established a board to 
oversee this redistribution called the Municipal Potash Tax 
Sharing Administration Board. So this board still exists now. 
It’s responsible for receiving the taxes that have been collected 
from the potash mines and redistributing to the municipalities 
within a 20-mile radius from around the mine. 
 
There were some significant changes to the Act in 1978, but 
since then the Act has remained relatively unchanged. So there 
have been some . . . [inaudible] . . . housekeeping changes in 
2005. But the bulk of content of the Act has not had much 
update since before I was born, Mr. Speaker, so it’s probably 
due for a revamp here. 
 
The bill that is being proposed is being designed to modernize 
the Act, as the minister has identified, and to make sure that it 
aligns with current mining practices and operations of the 
board. And there is a number of different components that have 
been proposed here, but the minister identified that there was an 
initial interim report that was provided for review, and there 
was some option for the rural municipalities, rural road 
infrastructure, to be able to review those proposed changes. And 
then the minister says that, based on the initial feedback that 
was provided by the report, the government drafted 
amendments and further consulted with stakeholders in potash 
and municipal sectors. 
 
So some of the questions that we’ll have are about the extent of 
those consultations, what the questions were from the different 
organizations that they were consulting with, and so on. 
 
Some reasons for changing the Act: so the minister argues that 
one of the primary reasons for amending the Act was to reduce 
the ambiguity of the potash-sharing calculation and to clarify 
how mill rates are to be calculated by the Municipal Potash Tax 
Sharing Administration Board. Apparently there was some 
confusion with the wording of the previous Act, and we 
obviously had a lot of time to see that out. There was some 
confusion with the wording so they wanted to alter that as well. 
 
Another key proposed change to the definition is adding “resort 
villages” to the definition of urban municipalities. So 
historically towns and villages were the only urban 
municipalities receiving benefits from this potash tax-sharing 
process, and this goes back to the initial nature of the bill. But I 
understand that resort municipalities were once a place that 
were seasonal and now that is changing in a lot of cases. So 
there is an argument to add them into the mix, that they 
shoulder some of the burden in providing services as well so 
they should reap some of the benefits additionally. 
 
There are also a number of changes to the administration of the 
board, the Municipal Potash Tax Sharing Administration Board. 
So there is some changes to the structure of the board, the terms 



March 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3673 

of board members. Notably the board has been expanded from 
three members to five members. There’s going to be allowance 
for a representative from SUMA, Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association, and someone from the potash 
industry as well, which seems to make sense considering the 
fact that these organizations are heavily impacted by this 
agreement. 
 
And finally the minister provides a lot more detail on what 
some of the additional housekeeping bills are, but argues that 
the main reason for changes to the Act is to increase 
transparency. So this is what we will be looking for, in addition 
to some of the information about the consultations that have 
taken place. So overall some of the motivations behind the 
legislation seem to be to increase overall transparency in what 
the funding agreement looks like, and to modernize especially 
in the case of housekeeping changes. 
 
There are some pretty thick explanatory notes here, Mr. 
Speaker, which speak to the fact that there are quite a few 
changes that are taking place here. Some of them more 
housekeeping than others. I find it useful to look at the 
explanatory notes when we’re talking about different pieces of 
legislation because it sort of explains what the difference is 
between the existing legislation and what’s being proposed. It’s 
sort of a guide, and anyone who’s watching from home is 
actually able to look up these explanatory notes as well. Often I 
have questions about where this information comes from, and 
you can find it directly on the Legislative Assembly website 
actually. So if folks are wondering at home, they can look up 
the explanatory notes themselves. But it is quite a thick 
document, which is a little bit atypical here. 
 
So I’ll just overview what some of those changes are and what 
some of the explanatory notes are. The first thing is changing 
definitions. So there are a number of different definitions that 
change here. One of the highlights is the actual municipal mill 
rate is changed, is redefined to clarify the definition of actual 
municipal mill rate to align with the current practices on the 
board and the original intent of the Act. 
 
So there’s argument here that the definition needs to be changed 
to leave no room for misinterpretation. So talking about the fact 
that there has been misinterpretation in the past, and there 
should be changes to reflect that as well, and a whole host of 
other definition changes as well. 
 
Section 3 has been repealed and rewritten to expand board 
membership. So we spoke about that with the representatives 
from the potash industry and SUMA being added. There’s 
changes to other sections. The term of office is changed from 
one year to two years to improve administrative efficiency. 
With the expanded number of board members, three board 
members now constitute a quorum, so the definition of quorum 
had to change. The rate at which government members are 
reimbursed based on Public Service Commission rates changed. 
This was the case previously, but it added words to clarify 
which rates are to be used. 
 
There’s the change in calculation for the mill rate in a 
revaluation year. So the previous wording was unclear and it led 
to some confusion. And the section is now separated for ease of 
reading and to clarify the intent of the legislation overall. And 

then there are changes around what’s required in the annual 
report, that the annual report needs to be tabled, and not only 
the financial statements. There’s new provisions around a 
standard date that is to be set when the board announces the 
mill rate for the year. 
 
And the explanatory notes go on. And I won’t bore our viewers 
at home by going through all of the pieces. If they are interested 
in the explanatory notes, they can go through them themselves. 
But I also just wanted to identify, Mr. Speaker, that this is a 
pretty hefty package of changes that are being proposed here. 
So we will have to go through this with a fine-tooth comb to 
make sure that the government is being diligent with these 
changes. So some highlights, some overview of highlights of 
what this bill does, since we delved into it in a little bit of detail. 
 
This Act changes the membership for the Municipal Potash Tax 
Sharing Administration Board. So it expands the membership 
from three to five members, now includes representatives from 
SUMA and the potash industry. This is still quite a small board; 
it’s still only five people. It seems to have been requested that 
they would have input. So overall that seems like a prudent 
change from my perspective, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Act redefines the actual municipal mill rate and we looked 
at that. The new definition sets a standard formula to be used 
for all municipalities. They state that a formula is added to 
make clear how the mill rate is to be calculated for potash tax 
sharing and to avoid improper calculations in the future. And 
this is something that we will certainly be investigating further 
with the minister at committee. 
 
There’s new provisions that modernize the Act, like changing 
miles into kilometres, a new section that outlines a standard 
date to be set for when the board announces the mill rate each 
year, and a new section that clarifies that tax tools are 
prohibited but that incentives are not. Municipalities can 
continue to apply discounts to tax on potash mine assessments. 
 
So I have a couple of concluding thoughts on this, Mr. Speaker. 
First, I think it’s critical that we get changes to this legislation 
right. We know that this Act has not been changed in substance 
since 1978, so I think that there is quite the opportunity here to 
modernize. But it’s important that we get this right. 
 
We need to ensure that there is meaningful consultation taking 
place. And I know the minister talked about some consultation 
with SUMA and SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities], but I think it’s important that we reach out, and 
our critic reaches out to these organizations as well, to make 
sure that they’ve been heard in the process, to listen to what 
concerns that they had in that consultation process, and how 
these changes are going to impact them. Because ultimately 
they are going to have a substantial impact on these groups. 
 
We know that sometimes consultation can be a concern for this 
government. We saw that with the release of the 2017 budget 
— and how timely that we are expecting the budget to be 
released right after our Easter break here, Mr. Speaker — where 
municipalities felt, I would say it’s fair to say they felt 
blindsided by changes to the grants-in-lieu with municipalities. 
 
[16:00] 



3674 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2018 

And we have seen obviously some of the repercussions that 
have come after those changes have taken place and really a 
downloading of those costs on to the taxpayer, a lot of 
reminders coming out that there is only one taxpayer, that we 
can’t simply download those costs to municipalities. So I would 
say that there has to be a repair in trust between this 
government and municipalities. And this is an opportunity to 
make sure that there is strong consultation done. So I would be 
interested in making sure that we’ve had those conversations, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know the importance of the potash industry in our province 
in terms of jobs, in terms of royalties that are paid back to 
municipalities. As always, we play a key role in helping farmers 
to produce food that feeds this world, not just in our province, 
Mr. Speaker, not just in our country, but internationally as well. 
We have a huge role to play in our potash industry. We need to 
make sure that we are being very careful with anything that, 
with anything that affects the relationship between 
municipalities and that industry. 
 
And secondly, the whole idea behind this legislation is to have a 
fair distribution of taxes within a certain radius to those 
municipalities. So the municipalities who are maintaining roads, 
who are dealing with water and wastewater, who are providing 
services as a result of the creation and maintenance of potash 
mines are adequately compensated. So we need to make sure 
that those municipalities have the supports that they require to 
help with the smooth functioning of the industry. There are so 
many people that flock to these areas for jobs and there is an 
increased burden on municipalities, but there is also an 
opportunity for them there. So this sharing agreement is quite 
important. 
 
So I want to make sure we get this right. I want to make sure we 
consult properly and make sure this is a fair distribution. I know 
that the critic will have more questions in committee and my 
colleagues will have more questions as well. But with that, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to move that we adjourn debate on Bill 
111, The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 111. Pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 112 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 112 — The 
Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis 
Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
always, pleased to be able to rise and enter into the debate on 
bills here in the Assembly. This bill is a very interesting one 

and the more I looked into it, the more questions I had about 
exactly how this is going to work. It’s a complicated area that 
the government’s wading into and I think it needs . . . There’s 
going to be a whole level of education that’s required for the 
people in the public once this bill is in place. 
 
Now when the minister rose, he did not give a lot of indication 
about how this bill is going to be enforced. And I think that’s 
one of the main questions that people in the province are going 
to have questions about. And I certainly do, Mr. Speaker, and 
I’ll just briefly touch on those concerns here today. 
 
One of the things I want to share with the Assembly is an article 
that I just found today, and it’s regarding — I’m just trying to 
find out who the author is here — it’s B. Platt at 
postmedia.com. And this was an article that was posted today. 
The article reads, and I want to share a large part of this article 
in the Hansard, but the article’s title is “How much cannabis 
could you smoke and stay under the proposed legal limit for 
driving? The answer may be zero.” And the article goes on to 
say: 
 

Last month, at a city council meeting in Kelowna, B.C., the 
ranking RCMP officer was giving his quarterly update on 
policing when a councillor posed a question about 
marijuana. 
 
“I know that when I go out for the evening, I can have a 
beer, and I know the alcohol content in that beer,” said 
Coun. Ryan Donn. “I know that one would be a good limit 
for myself to have before getting in a car and driving. 

 
And then he goes on to say — yes, Brian Platt is the author here 
— and then he goes on to talk about marijuana and he says: 
 

“How long does it stay in the system? . . . I know that I 
don’t have the answers if people ask me on the street.” 
 
RCMP Supt. Brent Mundle had little to offer in response, 
beyond saying public education is generally behind on this 
and that federal rules are still under discussion.  

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that’s a huge understatement 
when one says public education is generally behind on this. We 
have a bill here before us that is zero tolerance for presence of 
drugs in a person’s system. Now this may be in reaction to the 
cannabis legislation that’s also being brought forward this time 
around and the changes to the use of cannabis, but it goes much, 
much wider than cannabis use. 
 
But just on the cannabis issue itself, it says there’s newly 
released internal government research that indicates that 
confusion about cannabis is widespread. So here’s a survey: 
 

A Public Safety Canada survey conducted by EKOS 
Research Associates last fall found that although most 
people understand it’s illegal to drive when impaired by 
drugs, 43 per cent of Canadians don’t know how long to 
wait to drive after consuming pot, and one in six felt three 
hours was long enough — a significant underestimate.  

 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a public right now that’s about to be 
told it’s legal to consume and use cannabis, and yet 43 per cent 



March 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3675 

of Canadians figure it’s okay to drive a vehicle three hours after 
consuming cannabis and, as this article indicates, that’s “a 
significant underestimate.” So you’ve got half of the Canadians 
not understanding what sort of tolerance or how your body 
stores cannabis, how it’s measured, how these saliva tests and 
these new tests would detect the presence of marijuana or THC. 
And we are going to have people losing their licence and having 
their licence suspended. 
 
Now among the marijuana users that they surveyed, 48 per cent 
of them reported that they had driven under the influence at 
some point. And then among that group, people who drive 
while stoned, “. . . 25 per cent felt it was less dangerous than 
driving drunk and 17 per cent felt there was no risk to their 
driving.” So there’s an attitudinal problem here, Mr. Speaker, 
particularly when you’re bringing in zero tolerance for the 
presence of this drug in the bodies of the people that are 
driving. 
 
There’s “. . . a Health Canada survey released last year that 
found that 39 per cent of marijuana users had at some point 
driven within two hours of consuming cannabis, and only half 
of pot users felt the drug affected their driving ability.” So 
again, Mr. Speaker, the notion of impairment varies widely 
across people in Canada. And when we have these zero 
tolerance laws being introduced, people are going to be losing 
their licence and not really understanding the implications of 
this law for them. 
 
So one of my big questions for this government is, what are you 
doing to educate people about this bill? We have heard nothing. 
There is nothing in the minister’s comments about how people 
are going to be informed. This bill takes place upon Royal 
Assent at the end of May, presuming it passes, and the RCMP 
[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] can start laying charges on 
June 1st on these bills and on this bill. 
 
And this means people having their licence suspended without 
really any sort of education in terms of what the impact is, 
especially because marijuana will now be legal. So they’re 
consuming a legal substance, they’re under the impression that 
they are not impaired, and all of a sudden, they’re getting a 
suspension in their licence. So I think enforcement is a huge 
issue and I believe that education is a huge issue. 
 
This article goes on to say: 
 

As any police officer will tell you, this is not a new 
problem. It’s already illegal to drive when impaired by any 
drug, including legal prescription drugs. Police already use 
field sobriety tests on drivers to detect impairment . . . The 
rate of police-reported drug-impaired driving has been 
rising for years. 
 
But Bill C-46, the legislation now being hotly debated in 
the Senate, would introduce two major changes on this 
issue. 
 
One is the addition of roadside screening devices that 
allow police to test saliva for multiple drugs, including 
THC (the primary psychoactive in cannabis). The justice 
department has commissioned testing of devices and is 
expected to approve some for use later this spring. 

But the most significant change is the creation of “per se” 
limits for THC levels in the blood. This is essentially a 
legal shortcut that allows police to lay an impaired driving 
charge based on a driver’s blood THC level, without 
having to further prove impairment.  
 
Police already use per se limits for alcohol impairment. But 
breathalyzers and blood alcohol concentration have been 
proven to have a close, predictable link to impairment. The 
same is simply not true of saliva testing and blood THC 
levels, and this is where things get tricky.  

 
So the author goes on: 
 

Will Bill C-46 in its current form mean non-impaired 
drivers are nailed with criminal charges? The government 
points to two main safeguards in its defence. 

 
First, police must reasonably suspect a driver is impaired 
before ordering further testing . . .  

 
And then it goes on to say: 
 

Once an officer has reasonable suspicion, a saliva test or a 
field sobriety test could be ordered. Based on that evidence 
. . . [the person] could be brought back to the police station 
for a blood test . . .  

 
The government’s second safeguard, then, is the creation 
of a “low blood drug concentration offence” that comes 
with a fine of up to $1,000 . . .  

 
I’m not going to go on more about this article. I certainly would 
refer people to it. Again the author’s name is Brian Platt, and it 
was filed on March 28th, 2018 at 12:15 p.m. EDT [Eastern 
Daylight Time]. It was filed under Canadian politics. So I 
would recommend people having a quick look at that.  
 
One of the main issues I have with this bill is the definition of 
“drug” because the widening of this definition means that a 
significant number of people could be driving impaired under 
this definition of drug and not even realize that that’s the case. 
The new definition of drug means, and I’m going to share this, 
Mr. Speaker — this is clause 3(2), and it’s a new clause being 
added to The Traffic Safety Act, a new clause 2(1)(h.01) — and 
the definition is this:  
 

“‘drug’ means a drug or substance that causes or could 
cause a driver to be unable to safely operate a motor 
vehicle”.  

 
So I started thinking about all the over-the-counter substances 
that we can purchase when we’re sick, things like Sudafed and 
NyQuil. What about prescription drugs, Mr. Speaker? Sleeping 
pills, all of those things are now caught by this definition. And 
if a police officer has a reasonable suspicion that you are 
impaired, you could actually lose your licence for using 
Sudafed. I mean, that may be a far reach, but I’m not sure that it 
is. And I think before this bill is ready to be brought into effect, 
I really hope that this government has plans for a significant 
education campaign. 
 
What about legal users of marijuana? We know that THC levels 



3676 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2018 

remain in the body for a very long time. So what is truly 
impairment? And I think that’s the piece that’s missing in this 
bill, is this is a thorny problem that’s been around for a long 
time, but how do you determine impairment when someone is 
using chemical substances? 
 
And so I think this is opening the door for . . . It will certainly 
create a lot of work for criminal lawyers, particularly defence 
lawyers, and our justice system because I think this law’s going 
to be challenged in any number of ways. It creates a lot of 
problems for police forces as well, and I’d be interested to 
know how police forces are going to react to this bill, especially 
with some of these new zero tolerance clauses that are being 
introduced. 
 
Many of the changes in this bill are to The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act and then The Traffic Safety Act. And the large 
part is changes to The Traffic Safety Act. Under the automobile 
insurance Act, much of it is focused on referencing the new 
clauses in the federal Criminal Code that are being introduced. 
That’s the main changes to the automobile insurance Act, new 
clause in the Criminal Code 253(1)(a) or (b). 
 
So those changes are being applied and added to the list of a 
number of different Criminal Code offences, particularly in 
relation to subrogation for insurers, for example. And also in 
The Traffic Safety Act, it’s being added to the list of clauses in 
the Criminal Code where you may not be eligible for insurance 
if you were operating a vehicle while impaired. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Also there’s some fairly heavy penalties now being imposed on 
new drivers if they choose to partake in substances, drugs as 
defined under this Act. For example a new driver, as defined in 
section 149 of The Traffic Safety Act, is now subject to a new 
clause called “New driver zero tolerance — drugs.” And this is 
a new clause 150.11(1) of The Traffic Safety Act. And the 
clause is quite long, Mr. Speaker, but I’ll just read the first part 
of it: 
 

A peace officer may make a demand pursuant to section 
149 [which is the new driver clause] if the peace officer 
has reasonable grounds to believe that a driver drove a 
motor vehicle having any drugs in his or her body.  

 
And then there’s a whole list of things that the police officer 
can do if they have reasonable grounds. And as you know, Mr. 
Speaker, reasonable grounds is a topic of great debate amongst 
the judiciary and members of the legal profession. So that’s 
certainly going to increase the discussion on that. What is 
reasonable grounds when it comes to having drugs in your 
system? Again I ask, is Sudafed or NyQuil, you know, if you’re 
drowsy? What about caffeine, Mr. Speaker? Or warm milk in 
some ways has an effect of putting you to sleep, so is that going 
to be considered a drug if it affects your ability to drive? And I 
think these are real questions that our legal counsel in the legal 
profession are going to be asking. 
 
I’m not sure if this bill deals with that or not, and I think, as I 
said at the outset, I believe it actually creates more questions 
than answers. I have a brother who’s a criminal law lawyer in 
Red Deer, Alberta, and he has basically created an entire career 

out of .08 offences. I mean, he is an expert. He’s been to the 
Supreme Court. And these kinds of open-ended definitions are 
really taking us down a path that I think is going to cause a lot 
of confusion. 
 
And I think people are going to end up with zero tolerance 
suspensions, some up to three days, for drugs that they had even 
no idea that they were impaired. And it just has to be in the 
body. It doesn’t matter whether you’re impaired or not. With 
the thing about alcohol, Mr. Speaker, is that we know 
scientifically what sort of limits people can tolerate before they 
meet a definition of impairment. We do not have that science 
for THC. We do not have that science for many of these other 
drugs. 
 
So I think although I appreciate the intent, and I certainly do 
appreciate a lot of the zero tolerance clauses that are being 
introduced as well for alcohol impairment, I think that’s much 
more cut and dried and easier to handle, as is evidenced by the 
existing state of the law. 
 
The other thing I often wonder is why these zero tolerance rules 
for drugs were not brought in much sooner. I mean, the fact that 
people have been driving impaired using drugs has been around 
for a long time, but it seems strange that it’s just being brought 
in at the moment that cannabis is being declared legal. And I 
just wonder if there’s an anticipation that the number of pot 
smokers is actually going to leap to great, high proportions now 
that it’s legal. I’m not sure that that will be case, and I would be 
interested in seeing the numbers on that as well. 
 
There are many, many changes being made in this Act, many of 
them related, as I said, to the criminal charges and the 
definitions in the Criminal Code. A large part of this Act is 
dealing with that, but the zero tolerance rules are ones that are 
going to have a significant effect, and I think the education 
piece has really been lacking. 
 
One of the things the minister said is that police will have the 
ability to lay new charges on Royal Assent. So that, as I said, 
Mr. Speaker, is coming up very, very soon, and I think there’s 
an onus on the government to ensure that people understand 
these significant changes to the law. 
 
Again I agree that impaired driving is a terrible tragedy in many 
cases, and so much can go wrong, and lives are lost as you 
know, Mr. Speaker. So impaired driving is a serious problem 
that we have to deal with, but I’m not sure that this bill meets 
the mark. 
 
Having said all that, I know that other of my colleagues will 
want an opportunity to weigh in on this bill as well. And so at 
this point I think I’ve exhausted my comments and I will move 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 112, The Miscellaneous Vehicle 
and Driving Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 
2017.  
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 112. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



March 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3677 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 113 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doke that Bill No. 113 — The 
Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Good 
to join debate this afternoon on Bill No. 113, The Planning and 
Development Amendment Act, 2017. It’s an interesting piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. And referring to the minister’s second 
reading speech on December 4th, 2017, I note with interest that 
the minister states the following. The minister of course at that 
point was then the member from Battlefords, Cut Knife before 
the member from Melville-Saltcoats took the helm. But, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister states: 
 

. . . the Ministry of Government Relations consulted 
extensively with internal and external stakeholders to 
prepare this bill. Preliminary engagement sessions were 
undertaken in 2014 and 2015. In 2016 and 2017, the 
ministry undertook 25 engagement sessions involving 
stakeholders representing 59 different organizations.  

 
It goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, that: 
 

As a part of the ministry’s engagement strategy, individual 
meetings were conducted with the following key 
organizations: Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association, cities of Saskatoon and Regina, the Saskatoon 
and Region Homebuilders’ Association, the Regina & 
Region Homebuilders’ Association, public and Catholic 
school divisions, and the ministries of Highways and 
Infrastructure, Education, and Agriculture.  

 
And then the minister goes on to thank those organizations for 
participating in what is, you know, we pretty much agree, a 
fairly extensive engagement and consultation process. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, casting your mind back, two years of 
preliminary engagement and then two years of actual 
engagement, and then here we are two years after that with 
legislation. You’d think that, you know, with all that 
consultation going on, Mr. Speaker, that topics like, oh I don’t 
know, the grants-in-lieu might have come up. You’d think that 
with all that consultation that things like the Provincial Auditor 
coming forward on the GTH land assemblage, that her finding 
that the lack of coordination between the GTH and the Ministry 
of Highways resulted in a tremendous loss of taxpayers’ money, 
Mr. Speaker, that the right hand didn’t know what the far right 
hand was doing over there, Mr. Speaker, in terms of that 
particular piece. 
 
And you know, somehow that all managed to happen against a 
backdrop . . . It all managed to happen against the backdrop of 
all this consultation going on, Mr. Speaker. How the heck does 
that work? It makes you wonder what’s on the agenda. Is this in 

fact earnest consultation, Mr. Speaker? 
 
So again, there’s all this consultation going on and yet different 
things going wrong out in the sector that this government, you 
know, still has to be dragged kicking and screaming to take 
accountability for, Mr. Speaker. You’d think that with all those 
meetings, something maybe would be happening at the 
meetings. 
 
But in terms of this legislation, Mr. Speaker, again there have 
been a number of changes made to the planning, the 
development regime in this province over the last decade, Mr. 
Speaker. And again, in terms of facilitating better coordination 
of action between different municipalities, in terms of the, you 
know, smoother, better, faster, stronger planning, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s all well and good. 
 
But the proof of course, as is the situation always, Mr. Speaker, 
the proof of the pudding is in the eating. And in terms of what 
this government has had the taxpayer of Saskatchewan choking 
back on, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what’s happened at the GTH 
in one case, or last year with the budget, with the reneging on 
grants-in-lieu in many cases — not just consultation that had 
been taking place over years, Mr. Speaker, but agreements that 
had been in place for decades, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And of course everybody’s waiting with bated breath to see 
what will come from this round of consultation on the part of 
that government when it comes to long-standing agreements 
that have been in place with many of the very important 
partners that I’d listed off in the six-year-long engagement 
process undertaken around this legislation. So again, with all 
those meetings, Mr. Speaker, you’d think that would rule out 
some of these developments that we’ve seen of late. But 
apparently not. 
 
So you wonder if it’s more about better enabling the 
government to stick municipalities with the cost for joint-use 
schools. You wonder if that’s part of the situation. You wonder 
if, you know, what sort of impact things like the bypass, and 
again, the way that’s related to the GTH and the things that the 
Provincial Auditor’s weighed in on in terms of the lack of 
coordination. And again, the term “lack of coordination” 
doesn’t really do justice to the loss of taxpayers’ money that 
went on in the land assemblage around the GTH and around the 
bypass, Mr. Speaker, and the way that’s been ruled on by the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
And again the way that, you know, sometimes they take two 
steps forward in saying, you know, we want to get this sorted 
out around the conflict of interest regime in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, when they’re running, you know, say when some of 
them are running for leadership, but then that doesn’t work out 
so well. Then it goes back underground and you can’t figure out 
what really is the line over there, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 
words. But again, the actions speak louder than the words over 
there, Mr. Speaker, and they don’t say a whole heck of a lot. 
They don’t say a whole heck of a lot to be proud of over there, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again, we’ll see how this shakes out in action. There’s 
always these great checkups that we like to call budgets in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, and how that relates to, you know, 



3678 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2018 

whether or not you can have six years of meetings, you can 
have 25 engagement sessions with 59 different organizations, 
but if by the time the ministry gets through its good work — 
and again there are a lot of hard-working men and women out 
there in government relations work and the organizations I’ve 
listed off here, Mr. Speaker — but if all that work comes into 
cabinet and they start calling audibles, Mr. Speaker, and they 
start saying, well you know the way we can magic up the 
budget process, Mr. Speaker, the way we can paper over the 
different mistakes that we’ve made and the costs for those 
mistakes, Mr. Speaker, is to tear up decades-old agreements, 
Mr. Speaker, and stick the taxpayer with the bill for those. 
 
Or in the case with the GTH where they’re acting like deadbeat 
tenants, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if they’re going to have to 
sic The Residential Tenancies Act on the government, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of, you know, getting them to pay their rent, 
getting them to honour agreements with the city of Regina. You 
know, I don’t know what it takes over there for the message to 
get through, Mr. Speaker, but it’s certainly not there yet. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again there is some fine things that are done 
by this legislation. There’s a modernizing of a fee from, you 
know, the planning appeals committee in “. . . modernizing the 
maximum fee for appeals to local development appeal boards.” 
A quote from the minister’s second reading speech, Mr. 
Speaker, of December 4th, 2017, Hansard, of course, where: 
 

The existing fee of $50 was reset in 1973. Changing the 
maximum fee to $300 accounts for inflation and helps 
offset municipal costs associated with the appeal hearings.  

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, the alacrity of this government, the sort of 
fleetness of foot that’s on display here in terms of getting on 
those big issues, when all these other things are going on 
around us, Mr. Speaker. Again, fair enough, that’s a fine 
measure, you know. I’m all for updating a fee that is a year 
younger than myself, Mr. Speaker. Like, great work. But in 
terms of the other measures contained in this legislation, it 
doesn’t mean a darn thing if it comes to the cabinet table and 
then you start chopping that budget up in all the different ways 
that I’m sure we’re going to see on April 10th again, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[16:30] 
 
And it’ll be interesting to see, you know, which one was worse. 
Was it the budget of last year, or will it be the budget of this 
year in terms of bad choices, in terms of bad values on full 
display, in terms of making people pay the price for the 
mistakes of this government, Mr. Speaker? I guess that will 
await April 10th. 
 
But if indeed, you know, to make a variation on one of the 
things the old premier used to say, old Mr. Wall, where the past 
is prologue, Mr. Speaker . . . So if that is indeed the case, and I 
think it often is, come April 10th I’m sure we ain’t seen nothing 
yet, as regards the way that this government can confound and 
disappoint and, you know, tear up decades-old agreements. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as regards this particular piece of legislation, 
again, you can have the best law; you can have the best 
regulation in the land, but if you haven’t got a cabinet doing 

their part, if you haven’t got leadership in a government doing 
their part, then you’re going to wind up in some of the places 
we’ve seen far too much of in the very recent past, Mr. Speaker. 
And that will indeed indicate what is to come. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 113, The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 
2017.  
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
113, The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 114 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 114 — The 
Vehicles for Hire Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
honour to stand today to add my remarks with regards to the 
Bill No. 114, The Vehicles for Hire Act.  
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that this is the first time this bill 
has ever come to this Assembly because this is a new initiative 
that’s being looked into with regards to this government. But 
when you review the bill, it really has very little in it and not a 
lot of substance and explanation about how we want to go 
forward with regards to this legislation. And it also is putting a 
lot of responsibility on municipalities in order to regulate with 
regards to bylaws and around the licensing and standards and 
fees and other requirements that’ll be needed. 
 
And so I know this has been a hot topic of discussion at SUMA 
meetings and with councils on how they want to go forward 
with this legislation because it’s very important, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I know after this legislation was put forward, 
myself and a lot of my colleagues, we’ve been looking at 
stakeholders within the province and having discussions with 
them because this is a really important bill to put forward, and 
this is something that you want to do right when you first do it. 
You want to put forward all the right stuff. And we truly believe 
that this is something that would be good to look into. It’s a 
changing of our times. People are looking at different avenues 
of having rides and vehicles for hire. 
 
So this is really important that we implement a lot of these 
concerns and ensuring that when people are interested in 
bringing forward these businesses that we have some legislation 
and a framework. But again we don’t want to rush into 
something without looking at it and making sure that we’ve 
covered all the ground. And I know a lot of the stakeholders 
that we’ve talked to, they don’t feel that they’ve been consulted 
and that this was put forward by the minister without consulting 
the appropriate stakeholders, which isn’t a way that we should 



March 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3679 

be doing business in this House. And so I think that’s really 
unfortunate. 
 
We really want to make sure that we don’t have an uneven 
business environment, especially between taxi companies and 
the transport network companies, TNCs [transportation network 
company], they often call them. And we want to make sure that 
we don’t have a two-tiered system which could also potentially 
significantly lower the standards of transportation services in 
the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And so that is a big concern. 
 
So some of the issues that were brought to my attention with 
regards to this legislation is the definition of “vehicle for hire.” 
The Government of Saskatchewan in The Vehicles For Hire Act 
has defined a vehicle for hire as: 
 

. . . a service provided by a transportation network 
company that provides a vehicle and driver for the 
pre-arranged transportation of passengers for compensation 
through the use of a transportation network, but does not 
include a taxi service.  

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we don’t understand why the government 
has chosen to specifically exclude taxis from this definition. 
When you look at other provinces and the legislation that they 
put forward with regards to having an Act for vehicles for hire, 
they don’t necessarily exclude taxis. So I don’t understand why 
in Saskatchewan that was a decision made. 
 
So there’s a lot of thought into having the definition that would 
be changed in order to include that. Mr. Deputy Speaker, a TNC 
like a company like Uber or something — I hear there’s a few 
other companies such as that — they’re no different than a taxi 
company or a limousine company. A taxi meter is the same 
thing as a TNC app. They both calculate the distance and the 
drop time, the drop rate, the time and to ensure that they can 
calculate how much it’s going to cost for the ride. So they all 
operate in the same services. To believe that if the ride-sharing 
company is providing that service and charging similar ways or 
rates, that they should be classified together. 
 
So the Government of Alberta defines a TNC as an entity or 
individual that connects passengers with its drivers for 
pre-arranged transportation, exclusively through a 
transportation network. TNCs and drivers are operating on a 
for-profit basis. It is fundamentally different than traditional 
carpooling where a friend or colleague offers a ride to someone 
where both people are going to the same destination. With a 
TNC, a driver is going out of their way to pick up and drop 
someone off, and being compensated for more than just straight 
expenses or the vehicle’s wear and tear. 
 
So I think a solution for this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would be to 
propose that the government have a different definition with 
regards to TNCs, and then they could classify them as a 
ride-hauling company, a vehicle for hire, or even continue to 
add taxi in that definition. 
 
Also SGI, when it’s looking at insuring vehicles for hire, they 
really need to carefully consider what model of insurance that it 
offers for vehicles for hire, because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
want to ensure that this does not create an unfair system for 
other agencies that offer rides. Then that doesn’t make it fair for 

some of the businesses that have been long standing in our 
communities as well. So if it becomes cheaper to license and 
insure a TNC over a taxi, then the province will, very likely, 
start seeing a lot of the taxis going and operating as TNCs 
instead. So I think we’ve got to be very careful when we look at 
that, and I hope when SGI is considering their insurance rates, 
they’re considering that as well. 
 
Also in this Act, the language, from what I’ve read, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s proposing that local municipal governments 
inspect the vehicles for hire. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t 
think they are probably the best suited to be doing those 
inspections. Like, who would be responsible for doing that? 
What knowledge base do they have with regards to ensuring 
that vehicles are safe for individuals? I would think that SGI 
would have that experience. They would have the individuals 
there, and they’re definitely in the best position to enforce 
requirements. 
 
So I would like to see the government consider saying that these 
inspections will be done through SGI and possibly even it could 
be as simple as ensuring that they require a certificate of safety 
inspection at the time insurance was purchased. So that seems 
to be what is required for taxis, so I don’t see why that would be 
any different for ride-sharing companies to ensure the safety of 
residents who are using those companies. 
 
Also it indicates in here that if an individual has . . . Well the 
drivers need to have a driver’s licence, which I guess we should 
put that in there, but it should be simple. But it also says that if 
the driver has some type of criminal record that that might 
exclude them from being able to be a driver, but it doesn’t have 
a list of what that would look like. So a lot of municipalities, 
they create their own lengthy list of offences that might prevent 
someone from driving a taxi, so I don’t know if this is going to 
be left on the responsibility of municipalities to do this. Also, 
for the ride-sharing companies, I find . . . The minister put that 
in the Act here, but they didn’t identify what those offences 
would look like, and so leaving that open. 
 
And I think it should be really important that they require a 
criminal record check and a vulnerable sector check for every 
driver, as I believe is required for taxi drivers. And we would 
want to make sure those criminal record checks are done by the 
police, our local police services, because that would be an 
outside agency doing that. Because my understanding is some 
of these ride-sharing companies, they do their own criminal 
record checks for their staff, and so I think at times that could 
be seen as being a conflict. And so I would hope that that would 
be included that they require a criminal record check done by 
our local police services. 
 
The Act also doesn’t mention any requirements for drivers to 
have a PST [provincial sales tax] number and remit provincial 
sales tax, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that is a requirement for 
taxi drivers in order to do that. And so again if that’s not going 
to be the same requirement for vehicle for hire, that really puts a 
two-tiered system and could allow them to have services that 
are maybe a little bit less expensive, which isn’t fair business 
for a taxi service if they have to charge their customers PST. 
And I think also that that’s an area that we’re missing out on as 
well, especially the economic state that we’re in and putting 
PST on children’s clothing and all of those other avenues that 



3680 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2018 

the government is trying to seek funds. But not putting it on 
vehicle for hire seems to be interesting. 
 
Also, one of the things that are important to identify is that a lot 
of people consider vehicles for hire to be more advanced and 
more tech-savvy because they have more of an app system and 
that’s how you require those services. But taxi companies are 
also doing that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’re developing app 
services and texting services. I know I’ve texted our local taxi 
company and they’ve texted me back. It’s pretty neat. And so 
there are a lot of different avenues to do that as well. 
 
And taxi companies have been approaching the government 
about wanting to expand their services as well and offer more 
like a flex service within the province and have been looking at 
having a service that they can expand outside of the larger 
urban centres, which I think is incredibly important, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because when we look at impaired driving, which the 
minister indicated is one of his major priorities is reducing the 
impaired driving in our province, which is wonderful. And I 
think we’re all on the same page when it comes to that. 
 
[16:45] 
 
But when you think about these ride-sharing companies, the 
vehicle for hires,  oftentimes they operate in larger urban 
centres because they want to have a business where there’s 
more people available to access their services. But when we 
look at impaired driving within the province, impaired driving, 
our rates are very high in smaller and rural communities. And in 
those areas, there’s very little options for having different 
transportation options when you require them.  
 
And so the taxi companies within the province have been 
advocating the Saskatchewan government for a 
Saskatchewan-made solution with regards to that, so that they 
could have some opportunities to maybe expand their 
businesses outside of the larger centres. And maybe if they 
know there’s something happening in a smaller community, 
they could go during those times and offer their services at that 
point, or look at different avenues and explore that. 
 
And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we really are wanting to 
reduce our impaired driving rates and we really want to have 
some different options, I think we need to start evaluating that, 
you know, and how can we offer these services in the smaller 
areas. Because from growing up in a small town and still 
oftentimes being in small communities for events, I oftentimes 
see so many people leaving . . . And it’s just so normalized in 
those communities. But I think if they had more options and 
that started becoming the customs and what they were 
comfortable with, they would utilize that. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, like I said before, certainly no one is 
saying that we don’t want to bring in the ride-sharing 
companies. But we have to ensure that the regulations are in 
place and ensure that there’s safety for consumers and drivers. 
And that is definitely the role of the provincial government, so 
we have to . . . We also have an obligation to help our 
municipalities with developing these regulations. And I know 
right now they’re not feeling very supported, and they’re going 
to have a lot of tough decisions to make. And like I said, there’s 
not a lot of support here within this legislation. 

 
So I know my colleagues are going to have a lot more that 
they’ll want to add with regards to discussion with this bill, and 
I know the critic will have a lot of questions for the minister 
with regards to this bill as well. So with that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I have exhausted my remarks with regards to Bill No. 
114, and I will adjourn debate on Bill No. 114. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 
Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 114, The 
Vehicles for Hire Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 115 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 115 — The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s an important bill that we look at, Bill No. 115, An Act to 
amend The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006. And of course this 
speaks to people’s homes and what people can do in their 
homes. 
 
And this really clarifies some of the rules around prohibiting 
possession, use, and selling and distribution of cannabis, that 
type of thing, and gives new powers to refuse an application 
from a tenant who’s in contravention of an order. It talks about 
paying their rent for the duration of an appeal and what to do 
with property worth less than $1,500. The main, core pieces and 
I just want to talk briefly to those, to particularly the last piece 
about the $1,500. 
 
Now of course this may seem like a small amount to some 
people, but to some people who are living in poverty this is an 
awful lot. So I’d be curious when we talk to the ORT [Office of 
Residential Tenancies] people when they come, whether this is 
a reasonable thing or not. I mean was there a delay or what? Is 
it just that people want to get stuff out right away? This is 
unfortunate if it’s just a use of power, and that’s something that 
I have concerns about. 
 
The minister said when he introduced this bill just a few weeks 
ago that: 
 

We have become aware of . . . provisions of the legislation 
that provides some rights without concurrent obligations. 
Other provisions have proven troublesome. These 
amendments will make adjustments to bring the legislation 
to balance . . . rights of tenants and rights of landlords.  

 
And it seems that this is really going in favour of the landlords. 
And I don’t know whether the people who have been consulted 
in this, whether people like ROSA, the Renters of Saskatoon 



March 28, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3681 

and Area, and other groups have been consulted about this. 
Because we know this government is very heavy handed when 
it comes to this piece of legislation, particularly in favour of 
landlords. And so we have a lot of concerns. 
 
And in fact just recently, yesterday morning it was brought to 
my attention that in fact there is quite a backlog at the Office of 
Residential Tenancies, and that’s causing a real problem. And 
in fact one fellow has gone to court and was talking to a judge 
about the fact that hearings before the ORT are not recorded. 
We’re used to that in here where all words are recorded. Any 
kind of hearing, a court-like hearing, is recorded, but apparently 
at the Residential Tenancies office they are not recorded. 
There’s no notes taken of the hearings. There’s a decision 
made; that’s it. And if you take that decision to any further 
level, you’re really out of luck. 
 
Now for any kind of evidence that might be presented at the 
hearing, and this really goes in favour of some landlords who 
may have access to lawyers. I don’t know how many tenants 
who bring lawyers to it, but I understand that particularly in the 
light now that we see in Saskatchewan, pretty big landlords, the 
Mainstreet or any of those large ones typically have access to 
resources that others don’t have. 
 
So we’re going to have a lot of questions in terms of the power, 
the balance of power, particularly when it comes to a fair 
hearing and whether or not people do get fair hearings, 
particularly if, when the hearing doesn’t go in their favour and 
there’s no recording, no notes, other than a decision made by 
the ORT. And this is a problem and this is something that we 
really need to make sure is rectified. 
 
And so when the person called, the constituent called yesterday 
about this concern . . . And apparently there are people very 
aware of this within the Ministry of Justice and perhaps this will 
be resolved. But I do want to bring it to the floor today that this 
is something that I think needs to be rectified, and we’ll be 
asking a lot of questions in committee about this concern about 
balance of power and how that has got out of whack apparently, 
according to the minister. 
 
And he is trying now to bring it back into some sort of a proper 
alignment. And what does that mean? And what does it mean 
both for the landlord and for the tenant? Because all of these 
provisions here today seem to really aim at tenants. And are 
there issues? Has there been proper consultation with tenants? 
And looking at what’s been happening in our cities and our 
communities with our apartment blocks. 
 
We see for example, we know, and we heard about this just 
before Christmas, in Saskatoon the rash of mailbox thefts that 
were happening in apartment blocks and the reluctance of 
landlords to act, ensuring that the apartments were secure. They 
were saying, it’s not really our issue; it’s somebody else’s issue 
in terms of security in the apartments, that they would only act 
partially. And then we saw the rash of mailbox theft. And of 
course prior to Christmas, whether that was being gifts being 
sent out or other important documents in the mail, people were 
simply not getting their mail. And people were complaining to 
the Office of Residential Tenancies, but the concern was that 
the office, there’s backlogs apparently. 
Now this is what we need to verify when we have the people 

before us in the committee because this is a big deal. There are 
thousands of tenants here in Saskatchewan, and they’re very 
concerned about their rights to security. It’s their home. And 
when they see this government acting in a heavy-handed way, 
and particularly when it comes to . . . We need to just touch 
briefly on the cannabis issue. When you can’t . . . If you’re 
allowing landlords to make rulings about what they can do in 
their homes but they can’t consume the cannabis in the parks or 
public places, which we agree with, and you can’t consume 
cannabis in your vehicle, so what are people who are going to 
be living in rental properties, what are they going to be doing? 
And is this going to really undo some of the positives of the 
legalization of cannabis, where we’re looking at a healthy 
approach to it? And in fact we may be doing it unintentionally. 
And this is a concern we have about this kind of legislation, the 
unintended consequences where yet again we are driving it 
underground. 
 
We know a good majority of young people are renters. This 
affects them. They are very concerned about what this will 
mean to their rights in their own property. And of course the 
price of rent, you know, that has gone up — and it’s still quite 
high — really it causes people to think, hey, I’m renting this 
place, I should have certain rights, and are they being adhered 
to. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would say when we do get to committee with 
this bill, I know my colleague from Fairview who’s the housing 
critic, and my colleague, the Justice critic, will have lots of 
questions on this because are there a lot of unintended 
consequences to this. And some of these seems . . . Have there 
been proper consultation? Has there been the follow-up with the 
people? And is the Office of Residential Tenancies, do they 
have the resources to do the work they need to do? And we’ll 
see that in the budget that’s going to be coming down in a few 
short weeks. 
 
And I’ve always been very concerned that they’ve just not had 
the resources. Good people that they . . . And they try to do 
their very best, but if they’re not allowed to do the number of 
complaints that are before them . . . They’re important work. 
It’s important work. It’s very important work. And if they don’t 
have the ability to record the hearings properly and make sure 
people have the evidence they need if they want to take it to a 
next level, to the Court of Queen’s Bench or small claims court, 
they need the evidence. But if they can’t get the evidence, 
they’ve been forced to go through a hearing of which they’ve 
already paid a fee. And I think the fee is 25 bucks so it’s not 
like it’s a cheap thing. And who knows? Those fees may be 
going up but we’ll wait and see. 
 
So I have to say that I have some real, real concerns about this. 
It’s quick. March 13th is when the bill came forward in second 
readings — just two weeks ago. And so this is something that 
we have some concerns about. And I know that we’ll be raising 
them in committee because we want to make sure. And it’s a 
sizable number of people who live in our cities and our 
communities and our towns right across this province in rental 
properties. And what does this mean for them and their own 
personal rights? 
 
And so I think that the minister, while he may be talking that it 
realigns or sets the balance, again we need to make sure that it’s 



3682 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2018 

not going too far. Because I have had, and we hear constantly, 
concerns about the ORT and a lack of resources and the 
inability for tenants to feel like they’re getting their justice 
there, that in fact the balance is the other way. Because we’re 
dealing with larger and larger corporations that own the rental 
properties, and so the days of the mom and pop landlords have 
come and gone in a large sort of way, and we’re dealing with 
big, big corporations. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment of Bill 
No. 115, An Act to amend The Residential Tenancies Act, 2006. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 115, The Residential 
Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 5 o’clock, the time of 
adjournment, this House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 
a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.]  
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Imputing Motives 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3651 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3651 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3651 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3651 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3651 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3652 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3652 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3652 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3652 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3652 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Spring Free from Racism Event 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3653 
 Reopening of Variety Place 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3653 
 Provincial Curling Championship 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3653 
 Young Athlete Recognized 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3654 
 SustainTech 2018 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3654 
 Hockey Team Captures League and Provincial Title 
  Francis ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3654 
 Opposition Claims Regarding Conflict of Interest 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3655 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Conflict of Interest Legislation 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3655 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3655 
 Support for Community-Based Organizations 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3656 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3656 
 Shelter for Youth in Swift Current and Area 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3656 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3657 
 Funding for Autism Supports 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3657 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3657 
 Management of Global Transportation Hub 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3658 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3658 
 Cost of Power for Saskatchewan People 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3659 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3659 
 Saskatchewan Employment Numbers 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3659 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3659 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Saskatchewan Signs Canadian Agricultural Partnership Agreement 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3660 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3660 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3661 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 72 — The Privacy Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3661 
  



 

 Bill No. 75 — The Electronic Communications Convention Implementation Act 
 Loi de mise en œuvre de la Convention sur les communications électroniques 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3661 
 Bill No. 87 — The Data Matching Agreements Act 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3662 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3662 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 121 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3662 
 Bill No. 122 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2018 
 Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3664 
 Bill No. 95 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3665 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 3666 
 Bill No. 97 — The Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3666 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 3667 
 Bill No. 98 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi modificative diverse (résolution des conflits familiaux) de 2017 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3667 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 3669 
 Bill No. 107 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2017 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3669 
 Bill No. 110 — The Animal Protection Act, 2017  
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3670  
 Bill No. 111 — The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017  
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3672 
 Bill No. 112 — The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3674 
 Bill No. 113 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017  
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3677 
 Bill No. 114 — The Vehicles for Hire Act  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3678 
 Bill No. 115 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3680 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


