


















































April 17, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 43A  TUESDAY, APRIL 17, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3855 
 April 17, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to you and through 
you to all members of this legislature, a group of outstanding 
Saskatchewan citizens seated on the floor of the House here 
today. 
 
With us are eight of the ten recipients of the 2017 Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal, accompanied today by the province’s chief of 
protocol, Major Jason Quilliam. Two of the recipients, Robert 
Dumur of Pasqua Lake and Audrey Heit of Kindersley, were 
unable to join us today but will be honoured at a later date. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning a number of us had the great 
privilege of attending a luncheon in honour of these guests. In a 
few moments each of them will be introduced by their 
respective MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. But 
first, Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome them and their 
families and their friends to this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the writer Thomas Carlyle said the work of an 
unknown good man or woman “. . . is like a vein of water 
flowing hidden underground, secretly making the ground 
green.” Those we honour today have not sought fame or glory 
as they quietly went about their work, making the ground 
greener in our province of Saskatchewan, making our province 
a better place. Mr. Speaker, through the years our guests have 
invested their time, their resources, and their energy in an 
incredible variety of causes across this province to make 
Saskatchewan so much stronger. And it is so much stronger for 
their efforts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we bestow one of the province’s highest honours 
so that these good women and men are known to the people of 
the province. We want everyone to be apprised of the 
extraordinary commitment that these folks have made to their 
community and to our province. We want everyone to be aware 
of their remarkable contributions so that more of us may find it 
within ourselves to emulate the example put forward, so that 
more of us might be motivated to follow in their footsteps, but 
also so that we may think of them, so that we may think of them 
and we may thank them with all they have done on behalf of us, 
Mr. Speaker. 

Today we honour 10 special people, inspirational leaders in 
their own right, exceptional role models, heroes among us, 
heroes deserving of our everlasting gratitude and our 
everlasting respect. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this 
House to join me in welcoming these outstanding citizens to 
their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, it was my honour to join the 
Premier and other members this morning in the ceremony that 
welcomed the recipients of the Saskatoon . . . Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal, Saskatoon in the case of one of my 
constituents. And we were just so honoured to be able to hear 
the stories of the way that these members of our community 
have contributed over the years time beyond all measure, 
beyond any expectation, and the way that that impacts the 
people that they touch, the people they work with directly, and 
the people that those people work with. 
 
These are actions, these are contributions that are passed on, 
that are like a wave moving through the province. And that 
wave of volunteerism has been a part of our province for many 
years, and it’s just such an honour to welcome and to ask the 
members to join me in welcoming these exemplary volunteers. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Wascana 
Plains. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
my privilege to introduce Ms. Michelle Al-Katib from the 
constituency of Regina Wascana Plains who today received the 
Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to 
introduce Mr. Mal Barber from the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy who today received the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce 
Mr. Scott Boyes from the constituency of Cumberland who 
today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Humboldt-Watrous. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to 
introduce Mrs. Shirley Frydenlund from the constituency of 
Humboldt-Watrous, who today received the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to introduce Mr. 
Paul Jaspar from the constituency of Saskatoon Meewasin, who 
today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 



3856 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
privilege to introduce Ms. Helene Kesten from the constituency 
of Regina Pasqua, who today received the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Southeast. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
privilege to introduce Mr. Eugene Paquin from the constituency 
of Saskatoon Southeast, who today received the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to introduce Mr. 
Vincent Somogyi from the constituency of Canora-Pelly, who 
today received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege 
to introduce in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 23 guests from the 
Saskatchewan construction industry here, and their names are as 
follows. I couldn’t name all the companies, because there’s 23, 
but they do represent the industry well. 
 
They are, and I’d ask them to give a wave, Mr. Speaker: Ashley 
Campbell, John Lax, Teck Shing Lee, Nick Sackville, Brian 
Baber, Ryan Leech, Kris Watrich, Mark Cooper, Stu 
Niebergall, Mike Martens, Larry King, Ryan Tynning, Warren 
Douglas, Cory Richter, Karen Low, Evan Hunchak, Dennis 
Burnie, Carolyn Bagnell, Dion Malakoff, Shae Lawson, Ian 
Knibbs, Chris Guerette, and Aleksandar Kisin. They represent 
companies and associations significant to the construction 
industry from across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. These are 
individuals who are literally building our province. 
 
As some of you may know, today is the final day of 
Saskatchewan Construction Week, which we began celebrating 
April 11th, and today is their lobby day. These representatives 
have met with MLAs, cabinet ministers, and government 
officials throughout the day. So on behalf of everyone in this 
Assembly, I’d like to welcome all of you to your Legislative 
Assembly here today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join in with 
the minister across and welcome our guests who are in the 
legislature today as part of Saskatchewan Construction Week 
and construction day at the legislature. We know that there are 
56,000 people employed in this province in the construction 
industry, in that sector. We want to thank these men and women 
who are here on behalf of industry today who are leaders in all 
of their sectors. 
 
We had an opportunity to meet with some of these leaders 
today. We met with Warren Douglas, Cory Richter, Karen Low, 
Evan Hunchak, and Carolyn Bagnell, as well as Ashley 

Campbell. I would also like to take this opportunity to welcome 
Dion Malakoff, who I didn’t have a chance to say hi to earlier 
today. And I ask everyone to join me in welcoming them to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
request leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
introduce several visitors seated in the gallery this afternoon. 
They are articling students who have been working with the 
Ministry of Justice or the courts across Saskatchewan. They are 
not only passionate about the legal profession, they are also 
involved in their communities. And I’m also proud to say that 
they have come through my alma mater, the University of 
Saskatchewan College of Law. 
 
It is my pleasure to introduce Jessica Brockman — I’m asking 
them to wave as I read their names — Allison Graham, 
Michelle Korpan, Lauren Scharfstein who are clerking with the 
Court of Appeal for Saskatchewan. 
 
Jessica Brockman spent time as a domestic violence court case 
worker and interned in public prosecutions. Upon the 
completion of her articles, Jessica will be an associate with the 
firm Stevenson Hood Thornton Beaubier in Saskatoon. 
 
Allison Graham is from Killarney, Manitoba. Allison says she 
enjoys watching the CFL [Canadian Football League]. And, Mr. 
Speaker, despite the fact that Allison is from Manitoba, I’m 
sure that she’s already converted to becoming a die-hard 
Roughrider fan. Upon completion of her articles, she will be an 
associate with MLT Aikins in their Regina office. 
 
Michelle Korpan will be pursuing a Master of Laws degree at 
the University of Cambridge in the coming year. Along with her 
academic accomplishments, Michelle’s community 
involvement includes volunteering with the Community Legal 
Assistance Services for Saskatoon Inner City and as a Youth 
Ballet of Saskatchewan dance teacher. 
 
Following her clerkship, Lauren Scharfstein will be working as 
an associate at the firm of Stevenson Hood Thornton Beaubier 
in Saskatoon. Lauren has been editor of the Saskatchewan Law 
Review and serves on the board of directors for the non-profit 
organization Dance Saskatchewan. She is also the winner of 
two provincial soccer championships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to introduce Lindsay Hjorth, who 
is articling with Legal Aid’s northern office. Lindsay received 
the 2018 Aboriginal Achievement Award from the College of 
Law as recognition for working with the Indigenous Law 
Students Association, and volunteering with Community Legal 
Assistance Services for Saskatoon Inner City. 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3857 

I would also like to introduce — I’m sorry, I’ve got to do this 
carefully — Mobolanle Depo-Fajumo, Nathanial Scipioni, and 
Laura Barath who have been articling with the Ministry of 
Justice. 
 
Mobolanle got her law degree from Nigeria and attended the 
University of Saskatchewan for a Master of Laws degree in 
taxation. She also spent time working as a civil coordinator in 
the ministry’s dispute resolution office. In her spare time, she 
enjoys photography, watching movies, travelling, and exploring 
new places. 
 
During law school, Nathanial competed in the 2017 Jessup 
International Law Moot, and participated in the Wahkohtowin 
justice class, which means “kinship” in Cree. After he 
completes his articles, Nathanial will be joining public 
prosecutions as a Crown prosecutor in Regina. 
 
Laura Barath grew up in London, Ontario, but also has lived in 
Calgary and Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, she describes herself as an 
odd duck, which means she would fit in well in this building, 
and she believes winter is her favourite season. So that would 
make anyone an odd duck, especially this year. She might be 
feeling right at home in our province this year. She has spent 
time volunteering with CLASSIC [Community Legal 
Assistance Services for Saskatoon Inner City Inc.]. She will be 
joining the legal services division in the ministry when she 
completes her articles. 
 
I would also like to introduce Noah Wernikowski who is 
articling with the Court of Queen’s Bench. We will soon have 
to wish Noah safe travels because he is set to move to London, 
England after clerking to complete a Master of Laws degree at 
the London School of Economics. He plans to return to Regina 
to practise. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce Jessica Nixon 
who is articling with the Provincial Court of Saskatchewan. 
Jessica spent a couple of years as a legal assistant and intake 
officer with Pro Bono Law Saskatchewan. She has very strong 
ties to the community in Regina and has done extensive 
volunteer work with many organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am extremely proud of this group of articling 
students and am confident that we will see great things from 
them in the future. Please join me in welcoming them to the 
legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the minister in welcoming these articling students today to their 
legislature. Mr. Speaker, it’s always my favourite time of the 
year when we bring the articling students to welcome them. I’m 
always excited and humbled to hear their respective resumés, 
and it’s always great to see what you do in the future. So 
welcome to the profession, and I’m very honoured and excited 
to see what you’ll do with your lives moving forward. 
 
[13:45] 
 
I do in particular, Mr. Speaker, want to call out a few of the 

students that are sitting in the gallery, in particular, Mr. 
Speaker, Noah Wernikowski who I had the pleasure of working 
with when he was the communications officer at the Regina 
Catholic School Division, — he was there when I was a school 
board trustee — and, Mr. Speaker, Michelle Korpan and Jessica 
Nixon who I had the absolute pleasure of working with when 
they were intern students at Pro Bono Law Saskatchewan, the 
charity I used to work for. So I know the legal profession is in 
very good hands with these students, and I’d like to again join 
with the minister and ask all members join me in welcoming 
them to their Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I do want to introduce 
another individual who is actually seated in the west gallery. 
Vince Somogyi is not only just a recipient, he’s also the father 
of a wonderful daughter who is a good friend of mine who is 
seated there. It’s Jolean Somogyi. She’s seated in the west 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, to watch her father be recognized for the 
service that he’s done for the province. 
 
Jolean is an engineer at Mosaic. And aside from that, she is also 
married to another good friend of mine who I went to law 
school with several years ago, which is a little bit depressing to 
say because I sometimes often feel like I’m about the age of the 
articling students rather than someone who graduated several 
years ago. But it’s so exciting to see Jolean here this afternoon, 
and I’d ask all members join me in welcoming her to her 
Legislative Assembly as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the west 
gallery is a group of grade 12 students from F.W. Johnson 
Collegiate. There’s 41 of them. Their teacher is once again Mr. 
Scott McKillop. I look forward, as always, to having a talk with 
them after routine proceedings. I ask all members to welcome 
this group to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to rise 
today to introduce three guests seated in your gallery. And it 
perhaps is especially fitting that they be here during National 
Volunteer Week. Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are some 
members, representatives of the Regina Ski Club. We have 
Karen Hardy who does communications for the club. We have 
Ron Blechinger, volunteer and master groomer extraordinaire, 
who I’ll be talking a little bit about in a member’s statement and 
about the ski club. Ron used to work with my mom out at 
SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology] and polytechnic. 
 
But I have to tell you, Ron, for a long time I thought you lived 
backing on to Kings park, or the ski trails there. I found out 
later that he lived closer to home; he just spends a whole lot of 
time out there making sure that those trails are in good 
conditions despite some trying weather. 
 
Also with us today is Dale Hjertaas, the president of the ski 
club. And, Mr. Speaker, the Regina Ski Club is well served by 
their executive and their volunteers. They include over 680 
members and provide an opportunity for people in this city to 



3858 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

get out and enjoy winter. 
 
I was a little worried, Mr. Speaker, when I’ve had this 
member’s statement ready to go for a number of months, and I 
was worried that the snow might run out before they got here, 
Mr. Speaker. It turns out I needn’t have worried. So I invite all 
members to join me in welcoming these members of the Regina 
Ski Club to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, knowing that there’s a lot of guests today that 
probably can’t all be introduced, I did want to take an 
opportunity really quickly to recognize and introduce to you 
and through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, 
seated in the west gallery, another constituent of mine, Jo-Anne 
Cugnet. 
 
Jo-Anne is probably best known in this province and this 
country, and dare I say internationally, as the best-selling author 
of A Prairie Alphabet. But closer to home in Weyburn she is 
well known, Mr. Speaker, through the efforts of her and her late 
husband, Kenny, in all the work that they have done around our 
community and frankly across this province in making it a 
better place. And so I just want to take a few minutes to say 
hello to Jo-Anne and to formally introduce her in her 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to stand 
today to recognize two of my constituents up in the west side, 
Rae-Lynn Somogyi and Jolean. I guess she’s from Regina, but 
they’re daughters of Vincent who’s a long-time friend and kind 
of the glue towards Willowbrook, as well as his wife, Sandy, 
behind. 
 
Without that family, I don’t think there would be a 
Willowbrook, to tell you the truth. They’ve been involved in the 
curling club, the hall, raising kids, playing, coaching ball, and 
everything else. And Rae-Lynn’s teaching up in Yorkton and 
living in Willowbrook and following in her parents’ footsteps. 
 
And I’d also like to welcome them to their Legislative 
Assembly and just say that, you know, Vince has done a lot for 
this community but he still couldn’t hit my curveball. I’d like to 
welcome them to the Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Excellent. Well welcome, everyone. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Francis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from the citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer as 
follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Alsask, Eston, 
Kindersley, and Elrose. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. The 
undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan want to 
bring to your attention the following: that Saskatchewan’s 
outdated election Act allows corporations, unions, and 
individuals, and even those outside this province to make 
unlimited donations to our province’s political parties; and that 
the people of Saskatchewan deserve to live in a fair province 
where all voices are equal and money can’t influence politics. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan politics should 
belong to Saskatchewan people. And we know that the federal 
government and the provinces of Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, 
and Nova Scotia, and now British Columbia have moved to 
limit this influence and level the playing field by banning 
corporate and union donations to political parties. We in the 
prayer that follows . . . I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign finance laws, 
to end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 
from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 
on individual donations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today come from 
the city of Saskatoon and Melville. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
today to present a petition to increase the funding to Prince 
Albert mobile crisis. The individuals who signed this petition 
wish to draw these following points to your attention: Prince 
Albert mobile crisis unit has had to close its door during 
daytime hours, resulting in a loss of resource to people in 
distress. The daytime closure of Prince Albert mobile has put 
stress on the Prince Albert Police Service, Victoria Hospital, 
and other agencies who may not be trained and/or qualified to 
provide counselling and intervention services to clients. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to increase funding to 
Prince Albert mobile crisis unit so they may once again 
offer 24-hour emergency crisis service. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals that signed this petition come from 
the city of Prince Albert. I do so present.  



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3859 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for support of local small businesses 
as part with the legislation of retail cannabis sales. Mr. Speaker, 
the individuals who signed this petition wish to bring to our 
attention the following: the federal deadline for legalizing 
recreational use of cannabis is quickly approaching and the 
Sask Party’s lack of action has left Saskatchewan as the last 
province to start dealing with the provincial implications and 
regulations for the sale of cannabis; and despite clear calls by 
Saskatchewan people to keep wholesale and retail sales public, 
the Sask Party have said they plan to restrict retail sales to 
privately owned businesses only; and small and medium-sized 
businesses create the majority of jobs and keep more of their 
profits within local communities and Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly call upon the Sask Party 
government to give particular consideration to local small 
and medium-sized businesses when granting licences to 
dispense cannabis. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have pages and pages of this petition, but I know 
that the Minister for SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority] has announced recently that he will be making more 
information known about who is receiving these retail permits, 
unironically on 4/20 which is Friday, Mr. Speaker. So I’d like 
to present this petition today. I do so present.  
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Second Annual Saskatchewan Construction Week 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. April 
11th through 17th has been proclaimed Saskatchewan 
Construction Week, and the construction industry across the 
province has been celebrating. This is the second annual Sask 
Construction Week, bringing together more than 20 industry 
associations and business support groups. The week recognizes 
the crucial contributions of more than 50,000 Saskatchewan 
workers and 11,000 Saskatchewan businesses who expertly 
design, build, renovate, and maintain the public infrastructure, 
private residences, commercial spaces, and industrial facilities 
of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this vital work contributes to the economic and 
social fabric of our province in profound and significant ways. 
Construction is the province’s second-largest private-sector 
employer, providing some $2.5 billion in good wages that 
support Saskatchewan families. It accounts for 11 per cent of 
the provincial payroll, and it looks like this will continue into 
the future with over 10,000 people expected to enter the trades 
in Saskatchewan over the next 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, construction is responsible for converting 
investment into tangible assets and productive facilities. It is 

construction that fulfills the dreams of new homebuyers and 
new business owners. Construction enables economic 
expansion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here today we have many representatives of 
Saskatchewan’s construction industry, and I’d like to ask all 
members to join me in thanking the people and businesses for 
building our province every day and recognizing this 
Saskatchewan Construction Week. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Saskatoon Theatre Production Explores Homelessness 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Sunday, April 
15th, along with the Leader of the Opposition, I attended a play 
at the Broadway Theatre in Saskatoon called Home is a 
Beautiful Word. This production was presented by Persephone 
Theatre in association with Sum Theatre and the Broadway 
Theatre. It was a revival of the Belfry Theatre’s production 
collected and edited by Joel Bernbaum and directed by Michael 
Shamata. 
 
This play is an example of verbatim research, where 500 
interviews were conducted to bring together the actual script 
said by the actors. It featured a deep discussion around 
homelessness, where we heard from the housed, the homeless, 
and those who are one paycheque away from the street. 
 
Before the show, we heard from a panel of local community 
members: the Leader of the Opposition, along with Sheri 
Benson, Member of Parliament for Saskatoon West; Colleen 
Christopherson-Cote from SHIP [Saskatoon Housing Initiatives 
Partnership]; Dr. Kristjana Loptson, researcher from the U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan]; and Dr. Priscilla Settee, faculty 
member from the U of S. The speakers provided their thoughts 
on homelessness and barriers to housing in Saskatchewan. 
 
Of particular note to this Assembly, there was a discussion 
about the provincial government’s recent decision to eliminate 
the rental housing supplement in Saskatchewan, how this 
program helps to keep a roof over the head of some of our most 
vulnerable and prevents them from ending up on the streets. 
 
I want to invite all members to attend this eye-opening play in 
Saskatoon, which runs until April 21st, and to join me in 
thanking everyone involved in this production for their 
contributions to our community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Moose Jaw Health Foundation Celebration 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday, 
along with the member from Moose Jaw North, I was pleased to 
attend the 2018 health care foundation in Moose Jaw, hosted by 
our health foundation. The chairman of the foundation, James 
Murdock, shared with the attendees the ongoing work that the 
generous donors, volunteers, and health care professionals are 
doing to ensure quality health care for Moose Jaw and the 
surrounding communities. 
 



3860 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d specifically like to acknowledge the incredible 
volunteer work done by my former constituency assistant, 
Laurie Kosior. Laurie’s commitment to the success of the 
Moose Jaw foundation’s annual Festival of Trees — raising 
well over two and a half million dollars in 11 years — was 
given special recognition which was a nursing scholarship 
given in her name. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the overall success of the foundation has directly 
impacted patients in Moose Jaw in a positive way. The 
foundation helped the Dr. F.H. Wigmore Regional Hospital 
purchase an MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] machine which 
in the past year performed 2,700 scans, allowing access to a 
service that we hadn’t previously had available outside Regina 
or Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, over the past 31 years the 
foundation has raised $36 million, adding another donation this 
year of $2,474,878. 
 
I’d like to ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
Moose Jaw Health Foundation on their continued success, as 
well as thank them for their dedication on improving health care 
in Moose Jaw. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Regina Ski Club Embraces Winter 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, it’s no secret that Saskatchewan 
winters can be long and cold, but that’s life here in the province 
that we love. The members of the Regina Ski Club embrace our 
winters, relish in the opportunity to exercise, enjoy the 
outdoors, and build community while they’re at it. 
 
The Regina Ski Club has served the residents of Regina for over 
80 years. The club has a rich history and diverse membership 
that includes many community builders and lifetime athletes. 
Mr. Speaker, the club has several octogenarians that can out-ski 
the majority of the members, and they show no signs of slowing 
up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, community builders and volunteers plan ski trips 
like the annual Fred Cameron Memorial trip to Canmore. They 
clean up, trim, and groom trails all around the city and out in 
White Butte. Residents can use these trails and facilities for 
free. The club facilitates Nordic skiing and Alpine skiing and 
Alpine adaptive skiing for folks of varying abilities. There are 
programs for ages 3 and up, recreational and competitive 
programs, lessons, loppets, and local events and trips all around 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Regina Ski Club takes winter by the horns and 
transforms the challenges of winter into loads of fun. Events run 
on weekends and weekdays from December through March — 
maybe even into May this year. Their motto is, “Join us! We’re 
having snow much fun!” And, Mr. Speaker, judging by today’s 
forecast, there may be an opportunity for a little more fun yet 
this year. 
 
I ask all members to join me in recognizing the Regina Ski 
Club, its over 680 members, and its volunteers on a very 
successful winter season. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Pasqua. 
 

Saskatchewan Welcomes 233 New Canadian Citizens 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On March 28th and 29th 
I had the privilege to bring greetings from the government to 
two citizenship ceremonies here in Regina. 233 immigrants 
received their citizenship at these ceremonies, adding to an 
ever-growing number of new Canadians who call this great 
province home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a recent immigrant myself, I can say that 
Saskatchewan has much to offer. I strongly believe there is no 
better place to live and start your new life as a Canadian citizen. 
And many seem to agree. Approximately 107,000 new 
immigrants arrived to over 420 Saskatchewan communities 
from 2007 to 2017. This influx of people is a testament to the 
kind of province Saskatchewan has become. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province welcome these 
newcomers with open arms. We welcome their skills and talent, 
their culture, energy, and excitement. Canada and Saskatchewan 
are stronger thanks to their diversity. It binds us together as a 
nation and a province, and our motto says “from many peoples, 
strength.” Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this entire Assembly, I 
want to welcome these 233 new Canadians and all others with 
open arms. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Birthday Tea Celebrates Long-Lived Residents 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Mr. Speaker, a few weeks ago, I, along with 
the Saskatoon mayor, Charlie Clark, had the delightful privilege 
of attending a birthday celebration for 27 residents of 
Scott-Forget Towers, located in my constituency. This special 
event was in recognition of residents who were celebrating a 
birthday of at least 90 years of age. They are all living 
independently. 
 
I’d like to read their names for the record. They are: Veronica 
Wall, 92 years of age; Clara Johnston, 92; Paul Kuzek, 99; 
Petrona Boechler, 90; Eugene Bader, 90; Sheila Fasr, 90; 
Wilhelmina McTaggart, 92; Anne Mitchell, 94; Violet 
McCowan, 92; Helen Albertson, 90; Lois Speir, 90; Ruth 
Shanofer, 91; Rose Lukey, 93; Gladys Kirk, 93; Ruth Evenson, 
92; Sophie Kudyba, 95; Lillian Generoux, 93; Alice Linnell, 90; 
Doris Fanner, 92; Margaret Harrington, 90; Leeta Johnston, 92; 
Mavis Hassel, 93; Helen Bohrson, 92; Olga Meszaros, 91; 
Elizabeth Ralph, 92; Ruth Forrister, 98; and Theresa Hubert, 94. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I greatly enjoyed tea and cake and listening to 
some incredible stories from their lives. On behalf of everyone 
in this Assembly, I would like to wish a happy birthday to all of 
these 27 constituents. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Jansen Mine Strikes Potash 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I’m happy to share with you today the 
good news from BHP regarding their significant milestone at 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3861 

the Jansen potash mine. On March 30th, both the production 
and service shafts at Jansen struck the first layer of potash at a 
depth of 924 metres in what is called the upper Patience Lake 
formation. 
 
The next step for BHP’s 3.8 billion greenfield project include 
further excavation and permanent lining of both shafts. In the 
past decade the potash industry has committed over $20 billion 
for expansions to current operations and the development of 
new mines in Saskatchewan, including the Jansen product. 
 
Saskatchewan mining’s industry provides over 30,500 direct 
and indirect jobs. According to the Fraser Institute 2017 annual 
survey of mining companies, Saskatchewan ranks second 
among 91 jurisdictions around the world, and number one in 
Canada for mining attractiveness. And among 85 jurisdictions, 
the Mining Journal 2017 World Risk Report, that 
Saskatchewan’s a top-rank jurisdiction in terms of places in the 
world to invest resource capital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, should the project proceed, it is estimated that it 
will be the largest corporate investment in our province’s 
history. Our government will continue to work hard to ensure 
that Saskatchewan’s potash and mining industry remains an 
economic success story for our province. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating BHP, DMC 
Mining, and the many other partners on this very important 
milestone. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the school group for joining us today, 
and I hope that you have something to offer your MLA after 
question period. So that’s where we’re at now. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Provincial Sales Tax on Used Vehicles 
 
Mr. Meili: — On this side of the House we’re very committed 
to keeping life affordable for Saskatchewan people, which is a 
commitment that the members across once professed as well. In 
2007 this government ran on a promise to do away with the 
PST [provincial sales tax] on used cars. The premier said at the 
time that government should avoid doing dumb things, and the 
idea of charging the PST on the same used car over and over 
again seems pretty dumb. It’s a fair point, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what can we say about a government that breaks its election 
promise and throws a policy in reverse when it’s no longer 
convenient? The Sask Party got a lot of mileage out of this tax 
cut, and now that it’s no longer useful to them, they’ve decided 
to try to flip it back to the people of Saskatchewan to the tune of 
$95 million. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people know a lemon 
when they see one. They see this government looking to 
balance the books on people’s essential purchases, like a family 
buying a used car so they can get to work, or kids’ clothes, or 
restaurant meals. 
 
This government expressed a lot of concern about affordability 
for struggling families when they first ran for election. Why is 
the new Premier less concerned about that now than when life 

was significantly more affordable a decade ago? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member opposite 
for the question with respect to changes in the budget that was 
delivered in this Assembly last week, a budget that continues us 
on our three-year plan to balance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m pleased to say that we are on track to achieving that on 
behalf of the people in the province of Saskatchewan, on behalf 
of the people to ensure that we have that sustainable investment 
capacity years into the future, Mr. Speaker, for that next 
generation, for my children and others across the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The changes with respect to PST on light vehicles here in the 
province came about after much consultation with the industry, 
Mr. Speaker. In the months leading up to the budget, talked 
with industry organizations across the province. And this aligns 
Saskatchewan’s tax treatment on light used vehicles with all of 
the other provinces that charge PST on light used vehicles, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Again this was consulted and received support from many in 
the industry, Mr. Speaker. And it’s part of our broader initiative 
to ensure that this budget that was delivered continues us on our 
three-year plan to balance, Mr. Speaker. We’re on track. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The addition of PST on 
construction labour, kids’ clothes, restaurant meals, and now 
used vehicles puts us on track for an economy that continues to 
slow, and for life being much less affordable for people in this 
province. 
 
One of the strangest elements of this policy, Mr. Speaker, is to 
make SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] the 
after-the-fact arbiter of what the fair value of a used vehicle sale 
should be, based not on the amount actually paid but the listed 
red book value. So a person buying a used vehicle might pay a 
higher tax calculated than based on what they actually paid for 
the vehicle.  
 
Why is the government putting themselves in the business of 
determining what the right price is for a used car and penalizing 
those who buy for a bargain? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, in this province we are 
focused on affordability of the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We’re focused on that affordability 
not just today but decades into the future; unlike, unlike, parties 
of the same colour as the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, to the 
west of us that decided to run $8.8 billion deficits each and 
every year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are not in that market, Mr. Speaker. We are on a path to 
balance. We remain on track to that path, Mr. Speaker, all the 
while, all the while focused on affordability of the people across 
the province, Mr. Speaker. And over the last decade, we’ve 



3862 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

actually removed people off the provincial tax rolls — 112,000 
of them, Mr. Speaker, 112,000 of them. 
 
And to the member opposite’s point, a family of four with 
50,000 in this province will pay $2,300 less income tax than 
2007, a 77 per cent decline, Mr. Speaker. All the while we 
continue to invest in communities, in health care centres, in 
highways, in all of the infrastructure that people and 
communities across this province expect, Mr. Speaker. And we 
preserve the opportunity to invest into that infrastructure and 
those people far into the future. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Saskatoon Bypass 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, the climbing debt in this province, 
the amount we have to pay to service that debt, this is 
continuing to drag down on our finances and result in moves 
like this that make life less affordable and slow down the 
economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On the weekend we saw discussion of another megaproject 
from this government, the Ministry of Highways and 
Infrastructure announcing that they’ve established a route for 
the so-called Saskatoon freeway. And they’ve asked the city to 
endorse their proposed alignment. 
 
This freeway was first proposed after a study done in 2001, Mr. 
Speaker. The city of Saskatoon has changed a little bit in 17 
years. The Sask Party has not shared all of their current 
information with the city on this, and we’re left once again 
wondering if the government has a plan. They’re offering a 
proposal that has no clarity on funding expectations from 
municipalities, no clarity on infrastructure ownership and 
maintenance responsibilities, no clarity on access points and 
who’s responsible for building those, and no clarity on the 
expected phasing, timing, and procurement methods for the 
building. Along with that, no clarity on what the price tag for 
this project will be. 
 
How can we, with the experience with this government, with 
the climbing debt, have any confidence that the costs for this 
bypass won’t balloon out of control the way they have at the 
Regina bypass? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — A number of questions in there, Mr. 
Speaker. First of all, with respect to the Regina bypass, Mr. 
Speaker, that project is actually ahead of schedule if I’m not 
mistaken, on time and on budget, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
with respect to the debt in this province, Mr. Speaker, we have 
an operating debt that is nearly 10 . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Did you have stopwatches out to figure out 
how long they lasted? Six minutes. Okay. I recognize the 
Premier. 
 
[14:15] 
 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, this province, on a net debt 
basis, is second lowest in the nation of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
When you compare debt to GDP [gross domestic product], Mr. 
Speaker, we’re third lowest in the nation of Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. And with respect to the bypass around the city of 
Saskatoon, this is why we’re consulting, Mr. Speaker. This is 
why we’re talking to our stakeholders. We’re talking to the city 
of Saskatoon. We’re talking to those that would advocate or like 
this project, Mr. Speaker. And we’re talking about the growth 
of that city, not only over the last decade, Mr. Speaker, never 
mind the lack of growth in the 70 years previous to that, but in 
the last decade, Mr. Speaker. And we’re talking about where we 
will be into the future. 
 
This is what governments do as we consult, Mr. Speaker, and 
we ensure that we advocate at every opportunity for a strong 
economy here in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
That includes advocating for pipelines such as the Trans 
Mountain pipeline, Mr. Speaker, of which we’re a little unsure 
where the members opposite are, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
wondering, with their donation from, Mr. Speaker, with their 
donation from the BC [British Columbia] NDP [New 
Democratic Party] to their campaign, does that affect where 
they stand on this pipeline, Mr. Speaker? 
 
We know where their staffers are, Mr. Speaker, with 
hashtagging and tweeting of #StopKM [Kinder Morgan] on the 
great World Wide Web, Mr. Speaker. But we ask the members 
opposite. They’re going to have an opportunity to have a say on 
this. Let’s see what . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member from 
Regina Lakeview. 
 

Programming for Special Needs Students 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s cuts to education 
are still doing serious damage to some of the most vulnerable 
children in our province. Last summer Regina Public was 
forced to shutter its Discovery and Communication preschools 
for children with special needs. The two-year net cut of $24 
million at a time when classes are growing doesn’t even come 
close to fixing the problems that this government inflicted on 
our kids’ classrooms, and families are still left without options 
for their children. 
 
An FOI [freedom of information] captured some of the 
correspondence related to the forced closure of the Discovery 
preschools and, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read a few of their 
comments into the record. One parent wrote, “The long-term 
effects of this decision are dangerous. We will see more 
language-deprived children, which will result in poor literacy 
skills, poor self-concept, and increased social isolation.” 
 
What does the Minister of Education have to say to these 
parents? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re very concerned about early years, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
specifically concerned, Mr. Speaker, about ensuring that we’re 
providing the right supports, especially for children who have 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3863 

special needs, Mr. Speaker. You’ll note that last month I signed 
an agreement with the federal government that’s going to 
provide an additional amount of money that’s going to allow us 
to establish pilot programs in Regina and Saskatoon with 
respect to providing some of those supports, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can also tell the member opposite that we’re having 
ongoing conversations, Mr. Speaker, with the Chairs of the 
Regina, Saskatoon school divisions, Mr. Speaker, with respect 
to enhancing the program delivery, especially with respect to 
children that have special needs, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to 
continue that conversation. It’s important to this government. 
We understand the importance of ensuring that we’re providing 
those supports, Mr. Speaker. We’ll continue to work with the 
school divisions to make sure we provide those supports. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, all the conversations in the world do 
not return that critical year lost to these children because the 
cuts by this government. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to try another 
quote from a parent: “As a parent of a deaf child who attended 
this program, I cannot put into words my utter shock and 
disappointment with this decision.” Another quote, Mr. 
Speaker: “Right now no child should be left behind, and that is 
what these cuts are doing.”  
 
Yet another parent, Mr. Speaker: “A child who cannot 
communicate effectively with peers or their parents will 
become withdrawn, socially deprived, and depressed. This 
has detrimental effects on them both in the short and long 
term.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, these parents know what’s at stake here. Why is 
the minister prolonging with these detrimental effects by failing 
to undo the cuts to special needs preschools now because of the 
cuts from last year’s budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, we agree that no child 
should be left behind, Mr. Speaker. We have committed an 
additional $30 million in this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, to 
provide supports for children in the classroom, Mr. Speaker. 
And as I said in my previous answer, we’re pleased that the 
federal government has committed some additional funds 
through their programming, Mr. Speaker, under the agreement 
that we signed to help enhance the delivery of programming, 
especially to our early years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we’ll continue to have these conversations. I know that 
Regina Public is starting to accept children back into the 
program, Mr. Speaker. I know that Saskatoon Public is 
continuing to work to make sure that they preserve their 
programming, Mr. Speaker. This is important for me. It’s 
important for this government, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve made 
commitments to those school divisions to make sure that we can 
provide those resources. We’ll continue to have that dialogue 
with those boards of education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I’ve mentioned on many occasions, I’m pleased to sit down 
with parents of children that have these challenges, Mr. 
Speaker, to talk to them about what we’re doing as a 

government, Mr. Speaker, what the commitments that we’ve 
made as a government and what commitments we are going to 
make, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll all do that as a result of having 
ongoing conversations with all our partners, and all our partners 
in the education sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Funding for Children With Autism 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, dialogue is great but what these 
families want is action, Mr. Speaker. After two years of 
waiting, the Sask Party has finally budgeted for individualized 
funding for children with autism. Families are saying this 
funding falls short, the age restrictions are problematic, that 
many kids have aged out, and it seems they will be waiting even 
longer. 
 
Parents have been seeking information about the application 
process but can’t find much in terms of answers other than a 
vague explanation on the government’s website. Details of how 
to apply won’t be available until June. A list of eligible services 
won’t be posted until July. The minister and the Sask Party 
have had two years to prepare and deliver on this programming, 
and the lack of detail is unacceptable.  
 
What does the minister say to families and their children who 
again feel like they are left waiting for this long overdue 
support? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, as the Deputy Premier 
and Minister of Education stated, we take our children’s 
well-being very seriously, Mr. Speaker. I would remind the 
member that, you know, we did increase the funding to autism 
over the past number of years. Right now we’re at $8.55 million 
annually — under the NDP, $500,000 under the health budget, 
Mr. Speaker — aside from the other funds that do come through 
Social Services and through Education for these children, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We do know that there’s about 700 children that would be 
qualified for individualized funding. That’s why we’ve 
allocated 2.8 million extra dollars in this budget to move toward 
individualized funding. The process will roll out in July for 
applications, the detail of applications right now. The 
stakeholders are looking at some of the services that would be 
approved for those funds, Mr. Speaker. And funds will be 
allocated by August, but it will be going retroactively back to 
April, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this is the third budget since 
they made this promise, and to not have the details ready now is 
unacceptable. Families want answers about this programming 
but can’t find the necessary details they need to apply. They’re 
paying out-of-pocket for treatments like occupational therapists 
and speech language pathologists while they wait. Even if the 



3864 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

funding is backdated to April, families can’t start programming 
if they don’t know what providers are eligible to provide 
services until months later. 
 
This government has had two years to figure this out and figure 
out these details, and this plan is rolling out like it was drawn 
up on the back of a napkin. When will the minister provide 
families more details to assist them in accessing this long 
overdue program? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I think some of the 
stakeholders involved in rolling out this plan would be very 
interested at that member’s comments about being drawn on the 
back of a napkin. There’s been many individuals through the 
different ministries who have worked very diligently along with 
the stakeholders to roll out a plan that’s both responsive, 
effective, and will fill the needs of these children, Mr. Speaker. 
We have people within the Ministry of Health, Social Services. 
Those officials have been working for a number of months on 
this program, rolling it out to get it up and running as soon as 
possible. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, we are very proud of our record for the 
8.55 million and the additional 2.8 million to address the needs 
of those 700 children in this upcoming budget. Mr. Speaker, 
promise made, promise kept. It will be rolling out this year and 
again, retroactive to April 1st, so there’ll be no financial burden 
to the families that have been waiting for this funding. It will be 
retroactive to April 1st. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Funding for Post-Secondary Education 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I asked the 
Advanced Education minister about the Sask Party cuts to 
post-secondary education and student supports that are hurting 
so many across our province. She didn’t answer any of my 
questions and she certainly didn’t provide assurances to 
students at the U or R [University of Regina] social work 
program that they’ll actually be able to finish their program. 
 
In fact, rather than making higher education the priority that it 
needs to be, she said that she’s been encouraging universities to 
“. . . try to diversify their funding pool.” Does that mean more 
privatization, more tuition hikes, or both? What exactly is the 
Sask Party’s plan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I think I was quite clear in answering the member 
opposite’s question yesterday. There’s a difference between 
liking the answer and getting the answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With respect to operational funding for the universities, we 
have increased the operation funding for this year by 1.5 per 
cent in the Ministry of Advanced Education. I recognize that 
that is still creating some challenges for the universities, Mr. 

Speaker. And we’re going to work with them on a go-forward 
basis. 
 
I do want to thank the students from the social work faculty, 
Mr. Speaker, for raising those issues about their program, and 
faculty members for their institution’s attention. As an 
autonomous institution, Mr. Speaker, the university itself has 
some decisions to make there, and I’m happy to work with them 
on a go-forward basis. 
 
As for the diversification of the funding pool, Mr. Speaker, all 
universities in Canada have diversified revenue portfolios. That 
is the case for most of the institutions in Canada. The university 
has the fourth-highest dependence on government provincial 
resources, and I’m committed to working with the board of 
governors on that issue on a go-forward basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The minister says go-forward basis. 
We’re concerned it’s a GoFundMe basis, Mr. Speaker. You 
know the minister tries to blame the institutions for the mess 
that the Sask Party has created within those institutions. 
According to her, it’s their fault that they are now having to cut 
programs and hike tuition and that they’re scrounging for 
money, that they’ve been told that they have to scrounge for 
money and go look elsewhere. We don’t know if that’s tuition 
hikes, or privatization, bake sales, charity, or GoFundMe pages. 
 
But students are paying the consequences. We know that 
students right now have already felt the impacts of a 4.8 per 
cent hike in tuition at the U of S. We know that the president of 
the U of S has said that that’s a direct consequence of the Sask 
Party’s devastating budget. 
 
We need strong and vibrant post-secondary educations. And we 
need to make sure that we’re ensuring opportunity for young 
people today to fill those skilled jobs today and for tomorrow. 
This budget doesn’t cut it, and it certainly doesn’t repair any of 
the damage of last year’s budget. Instead of giving universities 
the green light for more tuition hikes, why won’t the Sask Party 
step up and properly fund our universities and students? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. First of all just to address the member opposite, he 
knows full well that universities set their own tuition rates. As 
an autonomous institution, they have the ability to do that. Our 
role in establishing the tuition rates, Mr. Speaker, has been to 
work with the boards of governors of all of our institutions to 
make sure that education remains affordable to the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. And given the amount that the provincial 
government provides in supports, in addition to student 
supports, we are subsidizing advanced education to a significant 
degree in this province because we think it’s important. And 
that’s also part of the post-graduate piece which our graduate 
retention program offers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would add this, Mr. Speaker, that when students graduate from 
college it is an investment, Mr. Speaker. An individual with a 
college degree earns 44 per cent more as a result of their college 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3865 

degree. An individual with a university degree, Mr. Speaker, 
can earn up to 85 per cent more on the course of their lifetime. 
These are important investments. They’re investments that the 
province shares, they’re investments that the individual shares, 
and they’re investments that the federal government shares. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Emissions Reduction and Renewable Energy Targets 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I asked the minister if 
he had a plan to get 50 per cent renewables by 2030. Now he 
listed off a handful of projects, but he failed to mention that the 
200 megawatts of new projects plus the existing capacity of 
wind adds up to barely 20 per cent of SaskPower’s own 
2100-megawatt target for wind power. His numbers just don’t 
add up. 
 
We’ve seen no plan to add the remaining 1700 megawatts of 
wind power. It’s crystal clear that the Sask Party is not on track 
to meet their targets. If they were, they’d have to add 80 per 
cent of that additional capacity in the final two-thirds of that 
timeline. So, Mr. Speaker, again what is the plan to get to 50 
per cent renewables by 2030, and what’s the plan for the other 
80 per cent of the wind power that will be needed? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
You know, Mr. Speaker, if we could somehow harness the 
power of all the white flags that the NDP have been waving 
lately, we’d certainly get to our 2030 target sooner than later, 
Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s been indicated by both 
myself yesterday, in an interview with the media, as well as 
SaskPower officials, we certainly are on track to achieve the 
2030 target. 
 
Analysis is under way currently on an RFP [request for 
proposal] for both wind and solar power generation. We’re 
looking forward to making announcements later this spring on, 
I think, a very successful RFP competitive process. And from 
that, that will drive decisions going forward. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
certainly confident that we can get to a 50 per cent renewable 
capacity target by 2030. That’s been indicated by SaskPower, 
by myself, and certainly that is our plan going forward. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a good thing that the Sask 
Party isn’t into archery because they have failed to hit any of 
their targets when it comes to emissions reductions. But you 
know how they solved that problem, Mr. Speaker? Just avoid 
having targets. That same indecision is plaguing SaskPower 
when it comes to the possible expansion of post-combustion 
carbon capture, utilization, and sequestration technology. 
 
Now the president of SaskPower said he would have a decision 
item on BD4 [Boundary dam 4] and 5 to his board in 

December. So, Mr. Speaker, has the SaskPower board made 
that decision? And if they can’t make up their mind, will the 
Sask Party make it for them? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we certainly 
appreciate the deliberations that the SaskPower board makes on 
a number of issues, but at the end of the day the Government of 
Saskatchewan is the shareholder of SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. So 
ultimately the government does have a decision that we need to 
make in the coming months, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s difficult to hear from the members 
opposite about targets, Mr. Speaker, and passing targets. The 
members opposite will know — and there’s two former 
Environment ministers sitting across the way; one out of six of 
their entire caucus is made up of former Environment ministers, 
Mr. Speaker — they presided over a government of the time, 
Mr. Speaker, when GHG [greenhouse gas] emissions went up 
by 70 per cent at the same time that people were fleeing this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been able to reduce the intensity of our 
emissions by about 15 per cent. At the same time the GDP of 
the province has grown by 24.4 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we are certainly going to do our part on emissions 
reductions. And we won’t take the advice of the members 
opposite and bring in a carbon tax to do so because it won’t 
work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — I’d like to harness some of the wind power 
coming from over there, Mr. Speaker. The question was, when 
will the decision be made on Boundary dams 4 and 5? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 
analysis is ongoing. Mr. Speaker, this is something that 
obviously the CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan] board and the cabinet will have to look at once 
the SaskPower board does their deliberations on the matter. Mr. 
Speaker, it will be over the coming months that we will make 
those decisions, not just on 4 and 5, but also we need to look at 
what comes after that: 6, Poplar River 1 and 2, and Shand as 
well, Mr. Speaker, as well as continue the work on an 
equivalency agreement so that we can extend the life as much 
as possible under the new federal regulations, Mr. Speaker. So 
that’s work that is all happening. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, we are doing work on renewables that 
will get us to 50 per cent capacity by 2030. And certainly this is 
the position of the board, the management of SaskPower, as 
well as the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Emissions Reduction and Provincial Tax Rates  
 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s becoming more 



3866 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

and more clear that the Sask Party isn’t going to meet their 
renewable power targets. But we also know they have no plans 
to meet their greenhouse gas emission targets either. There’s 
nothing in this year’s budget to help families make 
energy-efficient choices. In fact they’re taking away the PST 
exemption for energy-efficient appliances. 
 
Last year’s budget decision to add the PST on to construction 
labour drove up the cost for renovations and puts energy 
efficiency even further out of reach for families. Saskatchewan 
families want to save money on their power and gas bills with 
more energy-efficient windows and insulation, but slapping the 
6 per cent PST on construction labour makes that simply 
unaffordable. 
 
Will the Sask Party scrap the 6 per cent PST on construction 
labour so that we can make green home renovations more 
affordable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite of 
course is speaking to last year’s budget and a change that was 
made in last year’s budget. And he understands fully why that 
change was made. Resource revenues have gone down 
significantly and in order to keep the programs that we 
appreciate in this province for the people of this province — in 
health care, education, and social safety nets — to ensure that 
they are sustainable, Mr. Speaker, we had to shift away from 
reliance on resource revenue to reliance on consumption. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re also mindful of what affects the economy, 
Mr. Speaker. And in this province we have one of the lowest 
personal income tax in the entire country. We have one of the 
lowest corporate income tax in the entire country. We have one 
of the lowest small-business tax in the entire country. We do 
have the highest small-business income threshold in the 
country. We have the lowest PST of all provinces that have 
PST, Mr. Speaker. And you know what else that will help the 
economy and attract investment in this province, Mr. Speaker? 
We don’t have a carbon tax. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, their decision to slap the PST on 
construction labour blindsided Saskatchewan families, and it 
blindsided homeowners too, just like when they scrapped the 
EnerGuide home program that helped families save money and 
reduce their emissions. 
 
Now the Sask Party isn’t taking any steps forward when it 
comes to helping families reduce their emissions. They’re only 
taking steps backwards. They talk about changes to the building 
code and their prairie resilience plan, but they didn’t include 
any measures to help families pay for the costs associated with 
improving their energy efficiency. 
 
Will we see any meaningful programs to help families cope 
with the costs of reducing emissions? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like the member 

opposite to actually take a look at the budget document that was 
presented on budget day and look at the cost or the savings that 
families are experiencing due to the tax cuts that this 
government’s made over the last number of years. It’s on pages 
62 and 63. It shows the number of dollars that families in this 
province save, as opposed to other provinces within our 
country, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure why they keep ignoring that. 
 
Families in this province quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, are paying 
lower taxes than they did in 2007, Mr. Speaker, and all of that is 
managed through prudent tax cuts where it helps to stimulate 
the economy. But we did have to make difficult decisions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We need to stay competitive. We need to be able to create jobs. 
We need to attract investment into our province, Mr. Speaker. 
But we still are affordable when we compare our province to 
other provinces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Land Acquisitions for Regina Bypass 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Almost 
every other week we hear about another truck or combine or 
trailer getting stuck on the Regina bypass. And, Mr. Speaker, if 
it isn’t farm equipment the Saskatchewan Party forgot to plan 
for who are getting stuck, it is now the minister that is getting 
stuck on his facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Recently the Highways minister had to apologize after saying 
that there are no lawsuits surrounding land acquisitions at the 
bypass. Well, Mr. Speaker, that isn’t the case. Not only are 
there a ton of outstanding lawsuits, that number is growing 
quickly. He mentioned that there were nine lawsuits after he 
admitted there were. But, Mr. Speaker, that has now ballooned 
to 23 lawsuits.  
 
To the minister: how much are these lawsuits going to add to 
the ballooning $2 billion bypass tab? How much? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, to the member opposite I 
would say this: there were over 100 titles affected in assembling 
the land for the Regina bypass. In every kind of situation like 
this, there’s processes that take place that allow a fair and 
reasonable price to be given to the citizens that have land that 
are affected. And, Mr. Speaker, that is what the intention of this 
government is, to make sure that that takes place, that there is a 
fair and reasonable process, that people aren’t taken advantage 
of, Mr. Speaker. And that is what we are going to do. 
 
The people in that ministry and the people in the Ministry of 
Justice are working to resolve those things as quickly and as 
expeditiously as possible. Mr. Speaker, it is not beneficial when 
the members opposite sit and make complaints about something 
that is a process that’s under way. It’s before the courts and, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a process that this government is committed to. 
It’s a process that we’re going to follow. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
members opposite should just stay tuned as it takes place. 
 
 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3867 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 123 — The Snowmobile (Fees) Amendment Act, 2018 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 123, 
The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2018 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Crown 
Investments that Bill No. 123, The Snowmobile Amendment Act 
be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 124 — The Environmental Management and 
Protection (Environmental Handling Charges) 

Amendment Act, 2018 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 124, 
The Environmental Management and Protection 
(Environmental Handling Charges) Amendment Act, 2018 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 124, The Environmental 
Management and Protection (Environmental Handling 
Charges) Amendment Act, 2018 be now introduced and read a 
first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
my constituency of Melville-Saltcoats, I am pleased to rise in 
the House today to speak in support of the 2018-19 budget 
presented by our Minister of Finance. 
 
I’d like to first start off by thanking a few very important people 
in my life. First would be my mom, but I know she’s already 
changed the channel with the uninspired question period. The 
Blue Jays game is on, so I’ve lost her attention already. So I’ll 
have to therefore default next to my good spouse, Carla. I’d like 
to thank her for her endless support and really continuing to 
stand by me. I do know that since I’ve been away fairly 
extended periods of time, her scrapbooking has gone up 
exponentially. But I do want to say that she does make it 
possible for me to be here today and each and every day, and I 
really couldn’t have done all of this without her support. 
 
I’d also like to thank my sons Michael and Matthew. I’m very, 
very proud of their accomplishments in their life, and they do 
continue to inspire me. And I do feel for my youngest son, 
Matthew, who has quite a career choice in front of him that may 
actually bring him from the centre of the universe, Toronto, 
back to here in Saskatchewan. And it’s really those kind of 
decisions and opportunities that we’ve got in front in of us, is 
the reason that I want to stand here today. I’d also like to thank 
my daughter-in-law Laine and for our only grandchild, Brynn. 
And they are another reason that I want to leave this place a lot 
better than when I first found it. 
 
I’d also like to thank my constituency assistant, Rick McIntyre, 
who’s kept our constituency offices running perfectly and 
without a hitch. Really the other people I’d like to thank are my 
office staff here in the building, and that’s Grant and Tennille, 
Donna, Emma, and Launa who we lost to free agency, to the 
Premier’s office. But they’ve all been a great asset to our team, 
and really they all contribute such unique and special talents 
that have been a great benefit to our office. And it’s made for a 
much easier transition, really, to the desk in room 30. 
 
And to my constituents in Melville-Saltcoats, I thank you for 
allowing me to represent you here in this legislature. Each and 
every day I’m thankful that they’ve given me the opportunity to 
serve them and to help them make a better life. 
 
To my deputy minister, Tammy Kirkland, I’d like to thank her 
for her constant support and wisdom. The assistant deputy 
ministers in our ministry — Keith Comstock, our assistant 
deputy minister of municipal relations and northern 
engagement; Laurier Donais, our assistant deputy minister of 
corporate services and public safety standards and disaster 
recovery; Giselle Marcotte, our assistant deputy minister of 



3868 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

First Nations and Métis relations; and Duane McKay, the 
assistant deputy minister of emergency management and fire 
safety — I’d also like to thank all of these incredibly talented, 
dedicated, and hard-working people for their commitment to 
Government Relations. They are so full of knowledge and I am 
so lucky to have these people backing me up every day in the 
ministry. 
 
[14:45] 
 
I’d also like to take a moment to acknowledge Duane McKay 
and the emergency management and fire safety branch in its 
entirety. The emergency management and fire safety branch 
played a significant part in the recovery from the Humboldt 
Broncos bus tragedy of Friday, April 6th, 2018. 
 
For the people who were behind the scenes, like Jay Teneycke, 
director of communications for Government Relations and the 
whole communications branch. Jay spent a tremendous amount 
of time and effort arranging the conference call for RCMP 
[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] and EMFS [emergency 
management and fire safety] workers across the province. 
 
To our on-site rapid responders and emergency service officers 
who assisted the RCMP, we are so proud of the critically 
important role that these people and many more people played 
in the rescue and recovery efforts. And thank you to everyone 
who made an effort and worked so tirelessly to help the victims 
of this tragedy. 
 
I’d like to thank the member of Cut Knife-Turtleford who did a 
lot of work on key issues before me in the Ministry of 
Government Relations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last Tuesday was a day to remember. The member 
for Humboldt-Watrous delivered a very heartfelt and 
meaningful speech to express condolences for the Humboldt 
Broncos. She had said Humboldt is strong, and somehow we 
will figure a way to get through this. Humboldt is strong, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’ll never forget it. 
 
Last Tuesday was also that day that the budget was delivered. 
That budget was delivered by our Minister of Finance. Our 
Minister of Finance was the second woman to deliver a budget 
in Saskatchewan’s history. The member from 
Humboldt-Watrous tabled a very productive, dynamic, and 
well-thought-out budget this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had a tough budget year last year, but this year 
we as a Sask Party government have kept our promise by 
producing a budget that is on track to become balanced by next 
year. 
 
I want to touch on some specific things related to my ministry. 
The 2018-19 budget continues to support First Nations and 
Métis with significant funding for a variety of crucial services 
including education, health, and social services. Approximately 
$200 million is provided for targeted program funding primarily 
for First Nations and Métis organizations or individuals. 
 
The Sask Party government has invested 16.8 million for 
funding direct to the First Nations and Métis education 
initiatives and institutions, 74 million in gaming agreement 

transfers to First Nations and Métis organizations, 27.8 million 
in ongoing funding for training programs and services for First 
Nations and Métis people in our province, and 5.1 million in 
funding for programs and services connected to the joint task 
force in improving education and employment outcomes for 
First Nations and Métis people in Saskatchewan. First Nations 
contracts in northern communities wildfire protection increased 
from 1.5 million to 2.6 million, which is up 74.7 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our First Nations, Métis, and northern residents 
are integral to the success of this province, and we’re going to 
continue to engage, consult, and move forward on the many 
issues that they have established as priorities. And these will 
include movement towards a Sixties Scoop apology. And we’re 
going to continue to work on the calls to action in the Truth and 
Reconciliation report. 
 
In regards to municipal funding, the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s 2018-19 budget continues to provide strong, 
predictable, and stable funding for our municipalities. This 
budget provides 412.9 million of direct provincial support to 
municipalities, including municipal revenue sharing as well as 
funding for municipal infrastructure projects and other 
community services. 
 
Municipal revenue sharing remains on track at near-record 
highs. The amount this year is set based on one point of the 
provincial sales tax collected in 2016-17. 2016-17 represented a 
bit of a down year for us, but municipal revenue sharing is a 
no-strings-attached fund that is provided by our government to 
municipalities. And it’s increased. It’s increased from 127 
million in 2007 and ’08 to 241 million in 2018. That’s an 89.5 
per cent increase since the NDP was in government. We will be 
distributing 155 million to urban municipalities for municipal 
revenue sharing. That’s 68.1 million to rural municipalities and 
18 million to northern municipalities. 
 
It was announced at the recent SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association] and SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities] conventions that, as a 
result of the recent expansion of the PST base and the fact that 
the program is almost 10 years old, government officials are 
going to conduct a very thorough review of the current 
municipal revenue-sharing program in consultation with our 
key stakeholders. And our government remains committed to 
providing predictable and stable funding to our municipalities. 
 
But we do need to review this program. During those 10 years 
we have seen record population growth, significantly new 
infrastructure built, highways and bridges improved and 
constructed, schools and hospitals built. And our stakeholders 
are looking forward to the review process of municipal revenue 
sharing to ensure that the current format continues to serve their 
changing needs. Growth is never a bad problem to make 
changes for. 
 
Some of our stakeholders have mentioned that, even though 
they didn’t get all that we were hoping for, they thanked us for 
communicating the changes in advance so they were prepared. 
 
So finally I can quote numerous references made by our 
community stakeholders confirming that we provided clarity to 
grants-in-lieu. Grants-in-lieu will refer to grants in lieu of 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3869 

property taxes based on assessed values for government 
buildings in a community. In Regina this provides an additional 
1.1 million in revenue than what they had received before. 
Saskatoon, an additional 377,000 in revenue. 
 
All other terms that were lumped into grants-in-lieu are no 
longer going to fit under that definition. Franchise fees, no 
longer referred to as grants-in-lieu. Surcharges, no longer 
referred to as grants-in-lieu. 
 
We anticipate an additional 22 million of extra revenue to 
communities in Saskatchewan that had not received the 
surcharge that SaskEnergy had provided to only 109 
communities before this budget. We have now developed a fair, 
transparent, and equitable revenue stream based on 
grants-in-lieu along with power and energy surcharges. 
 
In my short time as Minister of Government Relations, I have 
experienced first-hand that communication is key. Key health 
investment for our province is $523,000 being invested in a 
universal newborn hearing screening program. Our province is 
getting younger. In fact, our neighbours in Churchbridge just 
had a newborn baby last month. Our other neighbour is 
expecting this summer. Newborn hearing screening is very 
important to them because it’s one less stress that they have in 
raising a child in today’s world. 
 
The much anticipated new individualized funding for autism 
allows parents to determine the best treatment regimen for their 
children. 
 
And our budget invests $378.6 million to help ensure a strong 
agriculture sector. This is very important to us, Mr. Speaker. 
Our province is built around agriculture. We’re committed to 
ensuring that we have opportunities to capture emerging 
opportunities wherever they may develop around the world. The 
future in ag research in our world-renowned Crop Development 
Centre at the U of S, Ag-West Bio, the Food Centre, or our new 
livestock facilities at the U of S in Saskatoon are going to 
ensure that we will continue to be competitive around the world 
when it comes to ag production. 
 
And we continue to remove some of the agriculture production 
stresses by constantly improving crop insurance and the western 
livestock price insurance program. We’re continuing to support 
business risk-management programs such as AgriStability and 
AgriInvest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a very exciting opportunity came to us earlier this 
year and that was the announcement of the protein industries 
supercluster, and it’s an incredible opportunity that this 
province is going to have and undertaking an advantage that 
we’re going to be able to utilize our innovation and ingenuity 
that has a potential economic impact of $4.5 billion over 10 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another part of our budget that means well for our 
province is found in social services. The budget for social 
services and assistance is going to increase by 25 million to a 
record $1.38 billion. This includes funding increases for foster 
families, community-based organizations that provide 
family-focused services, and services that support people with 
intellectual disabilities. Mr. Speaker, that means Rail City 

Industries in Melville or Langenburg and District Activity 
Centre in Langenburg and Esterhazy or maybe the St. Marie 
Bernard Hospice in Grayson can provide more and improved 
services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we care about the residents of Saskatchewan, and 
we’re going to continue to do what we can to support them. As 
our province continues to grow, the 2018-19 budget keeps our 
province and our economy on track by generating opportunities 
for increased trade, business, investment, and job creation. We 
are dedicated to maintaining competitive taxes such as the no 
increase in personal, corporate tax rates and, our most 
recognizable, no carbon tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is going to keep Mosaic potash, Nutrien 
potash companies competitive in the world market. It’s going to 
keep Bridgeview Manufacturing and Castleton Industries 
competitive in our world market. 
 
We’ve proved ourselves by maintaining investments in 
Saskatchewan’s infrastructures such as opening new schools 
and hospitals. New schools like the Langenburg Central School 
opened in 2016. Improving roads and highways like the planned 
passing lanes between Melville and Yorkton and between 
Yorkton and Canora. Opening new long-term care facilities and 
co-funding infrastructure projects such as the newly opened 
group home in Esterhazy or the groundbreaking on the new 
water delivery system in Melville. 
 
I’m happy to stand here today and give my support to our 
2018-19 budget and not support the amendment. We have 
listened to the people of Saskatchewan and we will continue to 
listen to them. Mr. Speaker, we continue to believe in the 
people of this province and the businesses of this province. 
We’re going to continue to make Saskatchewan strong and we 
will continue to build on our motto, “from many peoples, 
strength.” Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 
to enter into another budget debate here this year. Mr. Speaker, 
I do so certainly keeping in mind the good people that I serve 
and the good people who offer me so much trust, so much 
advice, and motivation to act and build a better province, Mr. 
Speaker. So I think of constituents all throughout Regina 
Rosemont who are really active, Mr. Speaker. And I’m thankful 
for their level of engagement and, as I say, their level of trust 
and faith. And it’s always through that lens that I assess a 
budget and the choices of a government. 
 
I also want to say thank you and recognize Gloria Patrick within 
our constituency office. Gloria has served as an exceptional 
constituency assistant for many years. She’s recently taking on 
an exciting new job opportunity for her, Mr. Speaker. She’s not 
only been a dedicated civil servant and constituency assistant; 
she’s continually advanced her own education and worked hard 
to do so and recently, I guess in the past year or two, completed 
her master’s of social work. And she’s going to take that 
master’s and her learning and her abilities and her care, and 
offer that to many within our community who I know will be 
better for her service and her effort. 
 



3870 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

But I certainly want to say to Gloria and have it on the formal 
record that her service to the people of our province, her service 
to the people of Regina Rosemont, is something that’s been 
exceptional and something that I’m thankful for. I’ll also miss 
having her in our office with her approach, and I think I’ve lost 
my personal counsellor, Mr. Speaker. But I certainly look 
forward to the work ahead with a very strong new constituency 
assistant that’ll be starting very soon as well. And I’d like to 
recognize . . . We have some casuals that work in that office 
who are incredible, Mr. Speaker. So I want to thank that team. 
 
I’d like to also recognize, as other members have, my family or 
our respective families. And in my case I want to say thank you 
to Stephanie, a grade 6 schoolteacher here in Regina at George 
Lee School, and to William, who’s almost four years old, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to recognize all their involvement in our service 
within their community, and certainly in the case of Stephanie, 
her advice as well. And she knows all too well the impacts of 
this government’s choices when it comes to education, Mr. 
Speaker. And I know on that front she’s incredibly motivated to 
do the best that we can for students and to step up as a 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to recognize my extended family: my mom and dad, my 
siblings, their families, Stephanie’s families. They’re all 
actively involved in my service and all actively involved in 
giving me advice and support, Mr. Speaker, and I’m thankful 
for all of it. 
 
We’re in the wake of an incredible tragedy that’s rocked our 
province, Mr. Speaker. And I want to, as other members have, 
pay my respect and offer my condolences, my prayers, and my 
care to all those affected by the tragedy that’s impacted the 
Humboldt Broncos, Mr. Speaker. None of us can fully 
understand what those parents and what those players and what 
that team has gone through. We can only imagine, Mr. Speaker, 
but it’s heart wrenching, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to say in the wake of that terrible tragedy, one that 
will cause hurt and impact on our province and many people for 
many people’s lives, Mr. Speaker, I’m so heartened and so 
thankful for the response and the love and care of so many 
within our province who have come together in the way that we 
know Saskatchewan people to come together, Mr. Speaker, and 
also so thankful for the support for those from right across 
Canada, right around the world, and led by our incredible 
hockey community, Mr. Speaker. So I want to put well on to the 
record that my thoughts and care are there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:00] 
 
When I enter into the budget here, Mr. Speaker, I always enter 
into it with a lens to identify positive measures or constructive 
measures that have been brought forward, and certainly it 
would be wrong for me not to recognize progress on a couple of 
fronts. Don’t get me wrong: this is a damaging and challenging 
budget, one that really represents poor choices by this 
government. But within it I’m certainly pleased to see the 
extension of full coverage for HIV [human immunodeficiency 
virus] medications for those that are requiring those 
medications. This is something that we’ve advocated for a long 
period of time, Mr. Speaker. It’s something that will save lives, 
it will save dollars, and it’s an important measure. 

I’m pleased to see the screening that’s going to be going on for 
babies around hearing loss, Mr. Speaker. That’s an important 
measure. That being said, we need to do such a better job when 
it comes to making sure then that we have the supports for 
hearing loss within our province. And of course in that 
devastating budget last year, we saw some of those supports 
directly being impacted, Mr. Speaker. So we’ll be vigilant on 
those fronts. 
 
Certainly I’ve spoken at length for the need to have support for 
a growing tech industry within our province, and there’s a 
measure within this budget that responds on that front. 
Certainly we’ll be assessing the adequacy and effectiveness of 
that measure. But this is an important industry for us to be 
supporting the growth of, and an industry that will certainly 
create all sorts of new opportunities for many within our 
province, adding strength and diversity to our economy here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I also want to recognize the attention provided in one measure 
to value-add agriculture in the province. Again on this front, 
we’ll assess with stakeholders across Saskatchewan the 
adequacy of this measure, making sure that it in fact is as 
effective as it needs to be, Mr. Speaker. But there’s limitless 
potential or enormous potential in this province when it comes 
to value-add agriculture. And we need to be doing all we can to 
be leading on this front and providing opportunity by way of 
jobs, by way of investment, by way of diversification to our 
economy, Mr. Speaker, and an economy that I don’t need to 
remind many has been dramatically weakened by the choices of 
the Sask Party government. So we need to look for measures 
wherever possible to create jobs for Saskatchewan people, 
ensure stability for hard-working people and families across our 
province who have been so dramatically hit by the poor choices 
from an economic perspective of this government and so 
impacted by precarious work and job loss, Mr. Speaker, and 
certainly then impacted in a significant way by the increases to 
the cost of living that have been foisted upon Saskatchewan 
people as a direct result of the mismanagement of the Sask 
Party. 
 
We’re at an important time within our province. Many would 
say that we’re at a crossroads within our province. We have a 
government that had been in power for quite a period of time, 
Mr. Speaker, that really went offside of Saskatchewan people 
over the past couple of years. A government that’s really broken 
trust with Saskatchewan people. A Sask Party and a cabinet and 
a premier that betrayed the people of the province that once 
elected them and offered a tremendous amount of trust. That 
trust has been broken within our province, Mr. Speaker. The 
things that give us strength today and for our future have been 
directly attacked by this government. The things that give us 
strength today and for our future are at risk and have been 
dismantled: our Crowns, our classrooms, supports for people 
and the very most vulnerable throughout our province. 
 
And we’ve seen a government that presided over an economic 
boom, Mr. Speaker, but that actively pulled apart the measures 
that give us strength. Boasted and coasted when times were 
good but didn’t get the job done when it comes to diversifying 
our province, ensuring security and peace of mind for the long 
haul — and a government that failed to save a dime, Mr. 
Speaker, during those best days. A government that in fact 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3871 

during times of plenty, times when dollars were rolling in in 
record ways, Mr. Speaker, a government that couldn’t balance 
their budget during those years, didn’t save a dime, piled on the 
debt, and actually drained the rainy day fund, Mr. Speaker, if 
you can imagine, when times were booming. A direct 
consequence of mismanagement on front after front after front, 
project after project that went sideways, by a government that 
was not playing with their own dollars, Mr. Speaker, but the 
hard-earned dollars of Saskatchewan people. 
 
You know many . . . These projects stand out in the minds of 
Saskatchewan people. The GTH [Global Transportation Hub], 
the untold millions that have been wasted. The bypass, Mr. 
Speaker, and the overrun that must be the biggest overrun in 
Saskatchewan’s history, Mr. Speaker, a project that originally 
was pegged for $400 million and that has now ballooned over to 
over $2 billion and counting and adding up. And, Mr. Speaker, 
now we’re learning this government mismanaged this project so 
greatly that there’s lawsuit after lawsuit calling on the 
hard-earned dollars of Saskatchewan people because of the 
mismanagement of that government. 
 
We saw the mismanagement in the project down near Estevan, 
Mr. Speaker, and a failure to provide the kind of security and 
peace of mind to those workers in that region, Mr. Speaker, that 
they deserve. Putting at risk the hard-earned dollars of 
Saskatchewan people and, you know, blowing through those 
dollars as though we had limitless money trees throughout our 
province, Mr. Speaker. That reckless abandon, that waste, that 
mismanagement has consequences. 
 
You know, it astounds many that open up the book of the 
budget and look to the debt page. And it astounds many to 
realize that this is a government that has actually tripled the 
debt since 2008 to where they’re headed, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
government that has doubled the debt in just the last two years. 
And this is a government that’s done that, Mr. Speaker, not 
because they were investing in the priorities of Saskatchewan 
people or investing in creating jobs and opportunity, but a 
government that couldn’t manage their projects, that failed to 
protect taxpayers. And of course it’s all of us that are on the 
hook for that, Mr. Speaker. But ultimately it’s the next 
generation that takes the hardest hit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our economy, without doubt, has been weakened. A 
government that has failed to support the diversification of that 
economy. I think of the film industry as just one measure, Mr. 
Speaker. We had a thriving film industry of course. We have 
the sound stage across the lake here, Mr. Speaker, that 
producers from all around the world were lining up at the gate 
to be able to come to Saskatchewan and film in that 
state-of-the-art sound stage. That sound stage now is of course 
underutilized because this government did in the industry. They 
did in the film tax credit. 
 
These were the choices of a government during times of boom. 
A government that chose to weaken our province instead of 
looking to add strength and diversity at every turn. And now of 
course it should be no surprise from a government that’s 
looking to sell off everything that’s not nailed down, Mr. 
Speaker, that we hear that this government’s now looking to sell 
off that sound stage. Something that’s an incredible asset to 
rebuild an industry, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll push this 

government. We’ll push back to make sure that that sound stage 
isn’t sold off. 
 
The right way to deal with this issue of underutilization is to 
rebuild the industry, is to reinstitute a film tax credit that works 
for Saskatchewan, that brings the world to us, that brings the 
investment and the jobs back, Mr. Speaker. But that sort of 
common sense is lost on the Sask Party at this point. 
 
And the concern is this is a government that’s looking for 
money and they’re looking to sell off public asset or Crown 
after Crown, Mr. Speaker. And you know, today it’s the sound 
stage that they’re looking to sell off, but tomorrow it’s SaskTel. 
And rest assured to Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, that 
we’ll be active every step of the way, certainly as the official 
opposition, also the New Democratic Party, but all people 
across this province to never let the Sask Party sell off our 
Crown corporations. And that’s why we’re at a crossroads 
within our province right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I say, we have a government that’s broken trust. I mentioned 
the GTH mess, the mismanagement. Of course it’s under 
investigation. Actually it’s beyond that. It’s over at prosecutors, 
Mr. Speaker. And this is an issue, of course, that the premier 
before and the Sask Party tried to dismiss as no big deal. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, it is a big deal. Those are the hard-earned dollars 
of Saskatchewan people. What I noted in the budget though was 
no mention of the GTH inquiry. No mention of getting to the 
bottom of that mess, Mr. Speaker. You know, a government 
that’s unwilling to put some daylight on a scandal like that isn’t 
worth their stock, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hard-earned dollars . . . And I have members that are actually 
heckling in here. And I get a kick out of it because we recently 
had those members all jockeying for positions over there and 
many of their members standing up and saying that they needed 
an inquiry into the GTH. And of course that simply hasn’t 
happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also see within this budget a complete failure 
to support students across Saskatchewan. And this comes on the 
heel of that devastating budget of last year that took $54 million 
from our classrooms across Saskatchewan, that put teachers out 
of work, that put educational assistants out of work, that grew 
the class size, that eliminated supports and programs for the 
very most vulnerable students. 
 
Now in this budget we see a little modest amount of dollars 
being allocated towards education. Those dollars are nowhere 
clear, nowhere close to the dollars that were stripped away from 
classrooms last year. Nowhere close to meeting the needs for a 
growing population within those classrooms and the complexity 
that we’re facing. The challenge that our students are facing 
across Saskatchewan is not one they should be facing alone. It’s 
time for a government to step up and to provide the resources 
that our classrooms need. 
 
It’s just the same in mental health. We see dollars that are 
insufficient in meeting the needs of people all across our 
province at a time where we should be doing all we can to 
extend services and supports, when people need them all across 
our province, Mr. Speaker. We know the consequences of not 
supporting mental health and addictions within our province. 



3872 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

Those costs are real. There are lives across our province that we 
should be responding to and supporting and saving, Mr. 
Speaker. But we also know that $1 into mental health and 
addictions services will save $7 in greater health costs. It will 
create greater productivity within our economy. 
 
We see within this budget a continued attack on the most 
vulnerable within our province. A government that’s of course 
stripped away dollars for those that need transportation and 
those with . . . for basic food budgets. Now they’re going at the 
basic housing support that Saskatchewan people have. These 
are people living with disabilities. These are families with 
children, Mr. Speaker, who are being stripped of very basic 
dollars, very nominal dollars to meet the needs of them and 
their family. It strips people of the peace of mind and security 
that they deserve and it’s simply not, it’s simply not reflective 
of the values that I know within this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also know that in areas like advanced education, this is a 
government that’s making education less and less accessible, 
more and more expensive. And the programs themself are 
having the dollars stripped away from them, pulling away the 
strength of what was and what needs to be an exceptional 
post-secondary system within our province. 
 
These kinds of choices directly impact our future, Mr. Speaker. 
They impact lives all across our province and they speak to the 
kind of province that we’re aiming to become. When we’re 
talking about not supporting students in their classrooms, not 
supporting the most vulnerable, not supporting those that are 
trying to access post-secondary, we’re limiting not only their 
future but the future of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see as well a government that eliminated a 
lifeline to Saskatchewan people by way of STC [Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company] and has left people with disabilities, 
people in remote communities, people that are needing to 
access health services without the access that they deserve, 
without the connectivity that they deserve. 
 
You know, I’ve heard incredibly challenging stories from so 
many people, so many with disabilities, Mr. Speaker, who have 
had their lives rocked by that decision that was so damaging, to 
scrap STC. It’s critical in our province that we do all we can to 
build back public transportation, to make sure that people 
across our province are able to have the dignity that comes with 
having access. And as the official opposition, certainly we’re 
going to do all we can to build back a public provincial 
transportation system within our province. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And I have the member from Martensville who’s heckling and 
saying, how are we going to do that from opposition? Well 
we’ll appeal to this government and call on them to act, to 
recognize the indecency in their choice that they made, and 
we’ll call on them to step up to the plate. And we’ll appeal in 
every constructive way for them to provide those services. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, ultimately there’s an election coming along 
as well, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll lay out alternatives to 
Saskatchewan people. And we’ll see if Saskatchewan people 
want to stand with the member from Martensville who’s 

heckling as we’re presenting, Mr. Speaker, the impacts, the 
impacts of those that have been impacted by the damaging 
sell-off of STC and the lack of decency behind those choices, 
the lack of common sense behind those choices, or if they’ll 
demand something better of those that are elected and a better 
path forward into the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see right now as well that we have an economy that’s been 
weakened. We see a government that’s failing on this front, 
that’s failing on the transportation file on front after front. And 
when we look at the issues around rail transportation and their 
impact on producers across Saskatchewan, the impact on 
exporters across our province, the impact on manufacturers, the 
impact on our refinery, Mr. Speaker, none of us should tolerate 
the underperformance of the duopoly that is our rail system, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s time for this government to act in the interests 
of the people of our province and make that rail system actually 
perform. 
 
Of course it’s not fair at all, Mr. Speaker, that as a vessel sits off 
the coast of BC, Mr. Speaker, that it’s the hard-working 
producers who got that crop off and put it in the bin who are 
paying the penalties for having that ship sit at sea and not be 
loaded, Mr. Speaker. That’s wrong. It’s not fair. We need to 
make sure we shift that responsibility to the rail companies, Mr. 
Speaker, and work to make that system perform. And we can’t 
treat those companies with kid gloves, Mr. Speaker, as we see 
time and time again by the Sask Party. We need to push for 
competition on those rails. We need to push for joint running 
rights and interswitching that would actually be in force, Mr. 
Speaker. And this is important to our economy. 
 
We need to make sure we do all we can to diversify this, our 
economy. We need to make sure as well we deal with other 
matters of transportation. We need to make sure we build 
pipeline capacity that gives producers in Saskatchewan options, 
that allows us to close that differential, that gets our resource to 
tidewater, Mr. Speaker, allowing us to maximize the economic 
and fiscal benefits of our resource in that important industry, 
Mr. Speaker, within our province. 
 
And we should be doing all we can as well, Mr. Speaker, to 
crank up jobs and acting to address emissions. And renewable 
power provides an incredible opportunity right now to be 
providing leadership that would be providing investment, 
creating jobs, and yes, also bringing down our emissions. That’s 
the kind of leadership that we need right now in our province. 
That’s the kind of opportunities that we need to extend to the 
people of our province. And wherever possible, as we bring that 
power production online, we need to keep those benefits local. 
We need to distribute that generation across Saskatchewan and 
make sure that the benefits are shared with farms and First 
Nations and homeowners and industry throughout our province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see within this budget that we . . . We see no action as far as 
commitments towards actual reconciliation, Mr. Speaker, no 
commitment to closing the gap between indigenous people and 
the rest of us, Mr. Speaker, no commitment to live up to our 
treaty obligations. And that’s a loss for all of us, Mr. Speaker, 
and certainly it impacts our future as a province. 
 
And it’s clear as well that we see this is a government that’s just 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3873 

not up to the task when it comes to responding to the very real 
fentanyl crisis, the very real crystal meth crisis that people are 
facing across our province. You know, as I sit down with many 
families across our province, Mr. Speaker, that have been 
ravaged by crystal meth within, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear to me 
that we need to step up to the plate. 
 
This is a government that seems to gloss over the reality that 
many are facing on this front, how hard that addiction is, Mr. 
Speaker. And they gloss over what I’m hearing from police 
forces across Saskatchewan as well, that there’s a direct 
correlation with the crisis and the utilization, the addiction of 
crystal meth, and crime and gangs all across our province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I see my good brother and good friend from Regina 
Elphinstone, our Deputy House Leader, is telling me that my 
time is up, Mr. Speaker. But I just want to say that this budget 
really fails to repair the damage caused by this government’s 
choices, that budget last year that attacked our classrooms in 
such a significant way, Mr. Speaker. It certainly doesn’t speak 
to the kind of future we should be acting on. It doesn’t step up 
to the plate to ensure the kind of jobs that Saskatchewan people 
need today. It certainly doesn’t build the kind of diversity and 
diversification that we need within our economy, so certainly I 
won’t be supporting this short-sighted and callous budget, Mr. 
Speaker. I will be supporting the motion and I’m thankful for 
the time to enter in here today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know it’s 
always interesting to follow the member from Regina 
Rosemont. And I caution the people because that side of the 
House seems to want to defer from some of the facts and go 
with their own agenda and it just, a lot of times it doesn’t make 
sense. I’ll just put that out there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is responsible budget by a responsible 
government that was brought down last week. It’s a budget that 
we actually brought in last week and this budget keeps us on 
track to what we need to do to get this province back onto a 
balanced budget. 
 
We’re getting away from the resource revenue that we were so 
dependent on for years. But this is a plan. It’s a plan to get away 
from the dependence on resource revenue and a plan to move 
back to a consumption tax and to get back to balance in three 
years, which will be next year. This is a plan and the plan, Mr. 
Speaker, I would say, is on track. It’s a responsible plan and it’s 
not going to tack a lot of debt on the next generations. That’s 
the kind of budget that we brought down. It was brought down 
by the hon. member from Humboldt-Watrous last week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my condolences go out to her and her community 
and especially to the families of the Humboldt bus tragedy. The 
member had indicated that for the last few months, that’s all she 
had on her mind was the budget, the budget, the budget. And 
then four days before the budget, the bus accident really took 
her mind off the budget and had to attend to the concerns of her 
constituents. And again my condolences, like everybody else’s, 
goes out to that community and those families and all that is 
affected by it. 

I also want to just mention the town of Nipawin. I served in 
both those communities in my previous employment and I 
know both communities. And as much as there’s a rivalry in the 
hockey industry from the hockey game in Humboldt and 
Nipawin, I’m sure that the Nipawin Hawks have felt as bad as 
everybody else and the citizens up there. Just a tragic accident 
and for sure our condolences go out to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I get too far into the budget address, there’s 
a few people that I would like to acknowledge, and first and 
foremost of course is my wife Debbie. She’s been a true 
supporter right through different employments and different 
opportunities and for sure in my work here not only in the 
legislature, but especially in the constituency of Moose Jaw 
North, going to different events and being there in support of 
. . . Always somebody I can bounce ideas off of, and I certainly 
appreciate her input. 
 
I’m a bit of stickler about having our constituency office open, 
as we say we are as representatives of our constituents. I don’t 
think my office has been closed for two days in the last 10 years 
because we are quite committed to serving the public and 
serving the constituents of Moose Jaw North and of Moose Jaw. 
So I want to give kudos to my office assistants: Judy Hatfield, 
who is very diligent in doing the work on behalf of the 
constituents, looking after their needs; and also to Rosalie 
Boots, who fills in from time to time. I’m certainly blessed to 
have that kind of assistant in the constituency office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I haven’t had an opportunity but I want to 
congratulate the member for Rosthern-Shellbrook, our new 
Premier, our new leader. Very strong in his passion for 
Saskatchewan, will represent us very well not only in all 
corners of this province, but nationally and internationally. And 
I appreciate his leadership and his direction and wish him well, 
and offer certainly all of my support, as have all the members 
here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to also acknowledge the new members that 
we welcomed into this legislature from Kindersley and from 
Melfort and from Swift Current — great gentlemen who will 
represent their constituents well and we wish them well and 
welcome here. 
 
I also want to congratulate the Leader of the Opposition, who 
actually comes from my hometown. It’s interesting. I know his 
mom and dad very well. They’re constituents of mine and they 
actually were members of our party and supporters of mine a 
few years ago. I don’t think they still have their membership in 
the party, but I know secretly they certainly still support me 
even though they won’t do it publicly. And very nice people. 
I’m certainly proud to have them. I know Mr. Meili is a very 
strong initiative, a good businessman in the community, and I 
know where his heart is and I thank him for that. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition is . . . I welcome his new 
perspective and the idea that he wants to do . . . I think the way 
he expressed it was he wants to do politics different. And you 
know that certainly is a nice touch, refreshing from what we’ve 
known, but I guess that my question, Mr. Speaker: when is he 
going to start doing this? Because we really haven’t seen it at 
this point. He says he wants to do politics different, and yet I 
quote from Hansard on Tuesday, March the 27th, and this is 



3874 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

what he said: 
 

We’ll head a little further west to my hometown of Moose 
Jaw where they just saw their sewer rates go up by 6 per 
cent, the water rate go up by 9 per cent, and a two-year 
increase of over 12 per cent in their property taxes — a 
direct result [he says], according to Mayor Fraser Tolmie, 
of cuts in the 2017 provincial budget. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I took exception to this. And I took that quote and 
showed it to the mayor and went over it with him, and he said 
that’s not what he said. Our mayor is very committed to 
working with us, to working with senior governments because 
he knows consultation and communication is the best way. 
 
Well to go a little further, our researchers went and found where 
this quote from the Leader of the Opposition may have come 
from. It was from Discover Moose Jaw. It wasn’t a direct quote; 
it was in a report. But even when you read the report, he had to 
twist it for some political benefit. And yet he wants to do 
politics different. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we were sitting here listening to the 
budget eloquently presented by the Minister of Finance, and 
right after she talked about the plan and how the plan was on 
track — the plan to get away from resource revenue — the plan 
was on track, how to bring it back into balance within three 
years. She finished doing this 45-minute presentation and the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana gets up, the Finance critic, and 
says, the first thing out of her mouth or one of the first things is, 
there is no plan. 
 
And I was almost embarrassed for her, Mr. Speaker, because 
you could see the body language of the people around her; they 
were kind of rolling their eyes and shaking their heads. Even a 
comment from your gallery, Mr. Speaker, said, wasn’t she 
thinking or wasn’t she listening? And it’s strange, but that’s the 
kind of way they promote themselves and the way they want to 
do politics different. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s phenomenal, the way we have to correct the 
preambles to a lot of their questions and the things that they do 
say. The member from P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote, in one of 
her quotes talking about the bridge and the repairs to the bridge 
. . . And when we took over government we had to invest quite 
handily into repairing the P.A. bridge. But on March the 22nd 
in Hansard, she said, “. . . as recently as 2005 the NDP 
contributed 4.3 million dimes in that year alone.” 
 
[15:30] 
 
Now is that trying to mislead the public? Did she think that we 
were going to think well, she said dollars. But in actual fact it 
was $430,000 that they put into it. But to say dimes instead of 
dollars is a mislead and that’s the way they operate, so we have 
to be very careful. 
 
And they want to do politics different. Mr. Speaker, the member 
from Saskatoon Centre last week — and the member from 
Athabasca went along with this too — talking about the 
millions of dollars that were left in the treasury when we took 
over in 2007 . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’m sorry, Mr. 
Speaker, I couldn’t hear your comments, but . . . 

The Speaker: — Sorry, it’s just the word “misleading.” Okay. 
Please just withdraw it, please. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — I will withdraw it. Mr. Speaker, you know, 
when it comes down to doing the presentations here in the 
legislature, it just . . . Sometime we have to be very careful of 
what we hear from the other side. I know the member from 
Saskatoon Centre, when he was talking, was talking about 
where did the money go. Where did the money go? They left a 
fair amount of money in the treasury. And to their credit, yes 
they did. But they didn’t look after the province very well or the 
people very well. 
 
I use an example of the seniors’ income supplement where it 
was at $90 in 2007 and it had been at $90 a month for the 16 
previous years. Mr. Speaker, we tripled that when we took over 
the government. 
 
And that’s not the only place. Like, there was a need for 
highways; there was a need for hospitals and health care and 
education. We had the longest surgical wait in the province. We 
had the lowest job creation and we had population loss. People 
were moving away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even the . . . When they talk about the Global 
Transportation Hub, it’s always referred to as a scandal. It 
wasn’t a scandal, Mr. Speaker. It hasn’t been a scandal. It won’t 
be a scandal. We had the auditor review that whole file and she 
said she could find no wrongdoing, but that’s what they still 
refer to it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if they want to talk about scandals, we can look 
back at a $35 million SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company] scandal. That’s the record of the NDP. 
If we talk about Murdoch Carriere, there was somebody they 
fired, and they fired him over allegations of sexual harassment 
and convicted of assault. They fired him but they gave him a 
severance of $275,000. There’s a scandal, Mr. Speaker. And 
Ann Lord, who sent a letter to their caucus saying that she had 
spent almost $6,000 in caucus funds that she wasn’t entitled to, 
and they hid that for years. Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s another 
scandal. So if they want to look at scandals, they can. 
 
But the Global Transportation Hub was set up to help to export 
the product of Saskatchewan and to grow our economy, and it’s 
a great idea. We’re a landlocked province. We haven’t access to 
tidewater. So we’ve got a Global Transportation Hub that 
increases the economy, helps attract investment into the 
province, and exports our goods to our customers all over the 
world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we were talking about the piece of paper and 
referring to the $2.5 billion deficit that the Leader of the 
Opposition was trying to impose. When he was doing that, Mr. 
Speaker, they didn’t know what we were talking about. And 
they finally asked us to table this document. Well it was their 
document, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the Opposition in his 
leadership campaign was trying to convince the people of 
Saskatchewan that they should spend $2.5 billion per year on an 
ongoing basis. 
 
And it was so ridiculous that even part of it was an $18 million 
for farmers not to use pesticides. Mr. Speaker, I’ve got news for 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3875 

him. They don’t use pesticides because they want to. They need 
to use them to protect their crops so we can have an economy; 
we can have the product sent to our markets and feed part of the 
world. And they just don’t understand that. And yet they want 
to do politics different. Mr. Speaker, we don’t want to run the 
kind of debt that they would want to run. We’re not going to do 
that. We’re not going to go pass it on to our next generation, to 
our children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce you to one of Saskatchewan’s 
newest citizens. His name is Malachi, Malachi Xavier 
Michelson. He is my newest grandson. Malachi was born the 
day before Easter, you know, and what a blessing to have a 
grandson that’s born . . . It would have been even, in one 
respect, a bigger blessing to have it actually born on Easter day. 
But this year being the year it was, he’d have had to live with 
having a birthday on April 1st for the rest of his life. So he 
came into the world the day before and, Mr. Speaker, a great 
big . . . a great blessing. 
 
He’s the brother to Josiah and Isaiah and the son to my son 
Brent and his lovely wife, Carmen. But you hold this baby in 
your arms and you look at him and you think, what a blessing. 
What a welcome to the world, just to have this child in your 
arms, so innocent. And then, oh, by the way, your provincial 
amount of debt that you have just inherited is over $6,000. That 
would be the idea that the Leader of the Opposition would have 
imposed on this child. We’re not going down that path. We’re 
not going to straddle our children with the kind of debt that they 
want to bring upon us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government’s expenses are down. The cost of 
government is substantially less than under the NDP 
governance, and we will continue to do that. We have reduced 
travel. We’ve improved efficiencies. We’re planning a future, 
for a strong future, and there is no carbon tax. Mr. Speaker, we 
want to continue with doing the right thing for the people of the 
province. 
 
This budget is about leadership. It’s about responsibility, 
accountability, control of our expenses. It’s about caring for our 
citizens, making Saskatchewan a better place to live and to 
work and to raise our children, to enjoy our parks and our 
amenities, and to cheer for the Riders, and to eventually retire 
with pride and dignity. It’s about planning for the future while 
maintaining a strong economy and a social program now in the 
present and growing our province. It’s about a budget that is on 
track. And it’s about a province that leads the nation in many 
sectors. Mr. Speaker, there is no carbon tax.  
 
I will not be supporting the amendment opposed by the 
opposition, but I will be supporting the budget brought down by 
our Finance minister. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Francis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 
rise today to address the legislature with my maiden speech. I 
realize this speech is to address the budget, but I’d like to touch 
on a few other topics before I get into that. 
 
Normally this would be an exciting opportunity, and it still is, 
Mr. Speaker. However since April 6th all of our daily tasks are 

now performed with mixed emotions and sad hearts. Mr. 
Speaker, last week was obviously a terrible time for us here in 
the Assembly as it was for everyone across the province and the 
nation. We will forever be changed by the tragic accident 
involving the Humboldt Broncos. We know it also extends 
beyond the 29 families of the passengers on that bus. It extends 
across the entire nation, province, and continent, and globe. 
 
I must say I was very touched by the member statements and 
prayer condolences delivered in the House last week. These 
were very meaningful, heartfelt messages, Mr. Speaker, that 
hopefully show the Humboldt Broncos’ families that they are 
not alone in this time of grief and that the members of this 
legislature truly care and are thinking of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, travel is part of being from Saskatchewan. It’s a 
way of life. We are all well aware of the risks. Mr. Speaker, I as 
many others in this legislature maybe even rode the school bus 
for years. My four siblings and I rode that school bus route 
three hours a day, five days a week from kindergarten to grade 
12. We carpooled. We rode in vans, bused for school sports, 
band, curling, hockey, baseball, and football. Countless miles in 
all sorts of weather and road conditions, Mr. Speaker. As kids 
we never ever once thought we were in danger even though it 
meant likely at times we were. 
 
I never sat down to do the math, Mr. Speaker, but I travelled the 
province extensively in the first 10 years of my working life. 
And I easily logged over a million kilometres not once ever 
worrying about road safety when I was single. But once you get 
married, have a family, become involved as a volunteer in a 
community, become a coach, or drive other people’s kids, you 
do change your mindset. In fact, the fact does remain that all it 
takes is one mistake by one driver or another and the results can 
be devastating to many. 
 
I can tell you with absolute certainty however, Mr. Speaker, that 
the highway system in this province now is exponentially better 
than it was when I was growing up. During the 16 years the 
NDP were in power prior to 2007, our infrastructure was a 
mess. Travelling the province during that time gave me a great 
insight on how people in rural areas feel about Saskatchewan 
and its issues. I worked for almost every Crown utility and I 
soon became aware of people’s political opinions on their 
current government. 
 
I enjoyed my time working in the government but was a 
casualty of the NDP cuts of the mid-’90s. The SaskPower 
program I predominantly worked on was scrapped. It was 
projected to be a 25 to 30 year project, Mr. Speaker. I believe it 
only lasted five or six. I see why the current NDP does not like 
to talk about the past. It was such a dark time with deep cuts 
including hospital and school closures. I wouldn’t want to talk 
about it either. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in crisis comes opportunity. And crisis is a 
little bit strong of a term for losing a job but in this particular 
situation . . . but certainly it was a major setback for me 
personally. But I suggested to my wife that we move back home 
to Kindersley, a move we were both unsure of at the time but 
have never regretted since. My wife was very fortunate to get a 
position with the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. For those of you 
not familiar with the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, it was moved 



3876 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

to Kindersley as a Fair Share Saskatchewan project from a 
previous Conservative government era. And I’m proud to say 
that it’s still going strong and has been a tremendously 
successful operation since being headquartered in Kindersley. 
 
In moving back to our home community, I was finally able to 
fulfill a dream of starting, operating, and owning a business, as 
well as farming with my parents. In 1996 we started our family 
and have made Kindersley our home ever since. Our two eldest 
children are now attending U of S in Saskatoon, and our 
youngest is finishing grade 10. 
 
So with just two years remaining until our nest is empty, my 
family wholeheartedly supported my decision to enter politics. I 
was elected as councillor, and subsequently appointed deputy 
mayor for the town of Kindersley back in 2016. And this 
quickly transitioned into running a contested Sask Party 
nomination event this past January. I competed against five 
other candidates in that nomination, and was fortunate enough 
to win that race on the final ballot. I went from the political 
sidelines to full-on politics and getting to deal with this crew. 
What a step that is. I can’t thank my family enough, and my 
constituents enough for this encouragement and support through 
this whole process. And at times these people are even 
encouraging, from what I hear. 
 
I’m also very thankful . . . I want to express my gratitude to the 
Premier, cabinet, and caucus, as well as the members opposite. 
Everyone has been quite gracious actually, and welcoming, and 
they have helped make this transition quite enjoyable. So thank 
you all for that. 
 
With my first month behind me, I am pleased to say that I am 
enjoying every aspect of this job. I don’t even mind the 
eight-hour commute per week, and if spring would ever get 
here, that commute will become easier. I did my first Monday 
morning commute yesterday, and apparently I was whining 
about my first 20-hour day. Fortunately, the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena kindly reminded me where the word 
“sympathy” falls in the dictionary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, change is in the air, plenty of change. Not just for 
myself, but so much change under this roof — a new Premier, 
new Opposition Leader, a new Lieutenant Governor, and last 
but not least, your own election, Mr. Speaker. Congrats to all of 
you on those great accomplishments. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been in the private sector for the last 23 years, 
and of course I’ve had some . . . Being your own boss for that 
long, you do have some apprehension on entering politics 
where you’re under the microscope. But so far it has exceeded 
all my expectations, and I wouldn’t change any of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I come from a very diverse community, a 
community of farms, ranches, small, medium, and large 
businesses mainly relating to agriculture and the energy sector, 
a community that, in my opinion, epitomizes the Sask Party 
core values, this government’s core values, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to speak and tour the 
office from the member from Cannington, a wise and 

battle-tested veteran that has more . . . I knew I might get some 
quips on that. He’s had more than his share of victories and 
defeats, Mr. Speaker, over his tenure. He gave me a quick tour 
of his office the other day. It’s quite impressive, I must say, 
with his trophies and his artwork. And I came across a photo of 
the original eight members that started the party back in the 
’90s. I told him I could only imagine the excitement that they 
felt and how their bold actions changed the political landscape 
in the province forever. We do owe them so much for paving 
the way for the successes we’ve enjoyed since then, especially 
in the last decade, a decade of growth since 2007. My hat is off 
to him and those others that participated in getting us here, 
including former Premier Wall and former MLAs. And I look 
forward to learning more from the member from Cannington as 
well as the rest of the members here. I hope to extract more 
information from these seasoned veterans as I make it through 
this very steep learning curve. 
 
The past is the past, Mr. Speaker, and they say there’s a reason 
that the windshield is a lot bigger than the rear-view mirror. 
However one still needs to remember the past when looking 
into the future. My constituents remember the past, Mr. 
Speaker, the dark past containing NDP governments, socialist 
ideals that has held us back for 80 years. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
only had one NDP MLA in Kindersley over the years; that was 
in 1971 to ’74. My constituents remember that all too well. 
Back in March they strongly indicated they never want to see 
another one, much less an NDP government. They came to the 
polls March 1st and overwhelmingly supported this government 
in that by-election. Over 88 per cent — according to Wikipedia, 
88.15 per cent of the voters — supported me and this 
government, Mr. Speaker, a very strong message and a strong 
mandate for the party. The left-leaning socialist mentality does 
not fly in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. The T.C. Douglas days 
are over. The post-depression war era is long gone. No 
disrespect or disregard to any of the great accomplishments of 
that era, Mr. Speaker, but it’s not 1945 anymore. 
 
Post World War II, Saskatchewan and Alberta were deemed 
fairly equal as far as population, wealth, and resources. Since 
then Alberta has seen multiple decades of growth and prosperity 
with conservative-minded governments while Saskatchewan 
has wallowed in socialist policies that hindered the economy 
and any hope of population increase. Sitting on our mineral 
wealth for a rainy day was a profound mistake, Mr. Speaker. 
Socialism has tried and proven to fail time and time again here. 
 
My late father who was a farmer and a cattleman and his friends 
used to say, if the NDP had their way, all anybody would ever 
own is a cow, a sow, and a garden. A joke of course, Mr. 
Speaker, but it speaks to the fact that free enterprising people do 
not wish to be controlled or hindered by their government. A 
government should work alongside its people in conjunction 
with private individuals and businesses, not compete against 
them or be in their way. Even with some of the tougher budget 
decisions that were made last year, my constituents continue to 
understand that rationale. They get it. They have to balance 
their books; why shouldn’t the government? 
 
My own business, Mr. Speaker, was faced with a downturn of a 
couple of years ago and we had some tough decisions to make. 
Our choices were either lay off 20 per cent of our workforce, 
our staff, or roll back everyone to a four-day work week so 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3877 

everyone could maintain their jobs. Everyone, including 
ownership, management, and staff took that 20 per cent hit, Mr. 
Speaker, without any job losses, and we made it through. 
Everyone participated. Employees were not pleased. Who 
would ever be pleased with a 20 per cent reduction? But you 
know what? When we got through it, everyone felt a winner. 
Everyone did their fair share to make it through a tough time. 
Tough decisions, Mr. Speaker, but that’s what responsible 
leadership does. They look beyond today, and that’s what this 
government does. 
 
Our constituents trust us to make sound decisions on their 
behalf. They know this government is thinking ahead and 
planning long term. Budgets are never perfect. There are always 
tough choices to make and it’s understandable when some feel 
their cause is perhaps greater than someone else’s. But the fact 
remains that this budget keeps us on track to balance by next 
year, Mr. Speaker, and my area supports fiscal responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituency has had its challenges. Farmers 
and ranchers and small businesses and the oil patch have all had 
their struggles. Lots of adversity, yet we stay positive, positive 
because we know we have a Sask Party government that has 
their backs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t express how much pride I see with the fact 
that our Premier and this government is standing up to the 
federal Liberals, the Trudeau Liberals, and their carbon tax. 
Saskatchewan stood alone for so long in this fight. We’re now 
seeing some potential allies developing, coming up to back us 
up. Hopefully that trend continues and we can have allies in a 
new Alberta and Ontario provincial government. Mr. Speaker, 
we on this side will continue to fight the good fight. We’ll let 
the opposition and their counterparts wave their white flags. 
 
It’s been a long-standing joke that the shortest book ever 
written was French war stories, but I think the NDP, I think the 
NDP across the nation can top that with how the NDP fought 
the carbon tax. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite aren’t just 
waving white flags, Mr. Speaker, they’re dropping their guns 
and running, something the members opposite might think 
appropriate, Mr. Speaker, but not the members on this side. 
Governments need to step up, protect their rights, protect the 
rights of the common people, and improve and enforce things 
like pipelines that generate jobs and provide tax revenues to all 
Canadians. 
 
I pray the electorate across the nation has watched this display 
of ineptness from provincial governments from BC and Alberta 
and federally and Ontario, and Canada should look at, take a 
good look at little old Saskatchewan. We’ll stand alone if 
necessary, but they should take a look at our model of 
government, look at our prairie resilience plan, look at our 
budget. Our approach works. It’s common sense. It’s 
sustainable and it will work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is obviously my first provincial budget 
experience. I had no input and cannot take any credit or 
criticism for its content, but what I can say is that it seems from 
both a personal and business perspective, it is very smart and 
well thought out. It sees savings in areas and increased funding 
in other crucial areas like social services and health. It doesn’t 
have any increases to tax rates and it creates stability in 

reducing reliance on non-renewable resource income. My 
serious congratulations to the Minister of Finance and her team 
as well as all those ministers and MLAs that had input into the 
2018-2019 budget. You clearly show that this government is in 
control, accountable, and committed to delivering high-quality 
services to the people of this province, and on track to return to 
a balanced budget by 2019-2020 and keeping Saskatchewan 
strong into the next decade. 
 
In closing I would just like to thank my family for all their 
support; my new hire, my CA [constituency assistant] Judy 
Penner, for agreeing to work for our Kindersley constituency in 
our office and holding that fort while I’m away; and lastly to 
my constituents for having the faith in me to be their 
representative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the budget motion as 
presented by the Minister of Finance, and I will not support any 
motion to amend it as put forth by the opposition Finance critic. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour 
to reply to the budget speech today. But first before I do that, I 
want to give my condolences to the city of Humboldt and to the 
Humboldt Broncos. It was an unbelievable tragedy that came 
upon them some 11 days ago. 
 
And you know, I think we’ve all been there. We’ve all 
experienced tragedy around us but not to this magnitude. I 
know the village of Borden, we had a couple of kids killed in a 
car accident 12 years ago that were on their way to a sporting 
event. And you know, that still affects our community. So it 
takes a long, long time to heal, and we all need to work together 
and do what we can to support one another. 
 
And so my condolences to Humboldt and all the people 
affected: the first responders, the ambulance attendants, anyone 
that had a part. You know, STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue 
Society] played such a large role in saving so many lives, and 
we need to be thankful for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the member for 
Rosthern-Shellbrook on his campaign and becoming our next 
Premier. A very, extremely strong leader and I think he’s going 
to lead us well into the . . . hopefully for the next 10 years at 
least. And you know, he just offers a lot. And he’s a 
down-home guy and actually comes from a good part of the 
province up around Shellbrook there. That’s where I grew up as 
well. And proud of him. And everyone in that community is 
extremely proud of our Premier. 
 
I also want to congratulate the Leader of the Opposition. You 
know, he worked hard and won in the end. So congratulations 
to him on that. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s a real honour to represent the 
constituents of Saskatoon Westview. Saskatoon Westview is a 
very diverse constituency, a lot of different nationalities. People 
moving in every day into that community. You know, you 
could have people that have lived there 80 years in the older 



3878 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

parts of my constituency, but there will be people that’ll be 
moving there this month or this week. And so thankful to have 
them in my community. And they’ve always been extremely 
respectful, and we’ve tried hard to accommodate any needs they 
have. 
 
I’d also like to thank my wife. My wife, Karen, you know, she’s 
always there, always supporting me any time I have anything to 
do. And just the fact of being away for a few days at a time, you 
know, that’s a lot of stress that she probably doesn’t need. But 
she’s willing to sacrifice so that I can achieve one of my goals, 
which is representing Saskatoon Westview. 
 
I also want to thank my dad. You know, he instilled in me the 
hard work ethic. Get out there and get it done. Nothing replaces 
hard work. And so I want to thank him for that. He’s 97 years 
old and up until this year he lived on his own. And what an 
amazing feat. I mean I can’t imagine living to 97, let alone by 
myself. 
 
Also I want to thank my CAs. In the last year I’ve had two CAs. 
My first CA, Sasha Peters, left on maternity leave and so Gwen 
Joa came in and helped me out and is going to take over for that 
year. And Gwen, as a lot of you will know, was Roger Parent’s 
CA. And so she comes extremely well qualified for the job and 
does an excellent job and is a great communicator for my 
constituents. 
 
I also want to thank my constituency association. You know, 
Kim Groff is my president and he’s a strong leader. And you 
know, there’s always a lot of work with a constituency 
association. You have to, you know, have meetings all the time 
and there’s always fundraisers to plan and always things to do. 
And so you need good leadership in that as well. So I want to 
thank my association for all their hard work. They get out and 
do the door knocking and meet with people and have a hot dog 
on the corner, so very happy about that. 
 
But you know, I really want to thank our Finance minister for a 
great budget, the member for Humboldt-Watrous. And you 
know, she delivered a budget that’s very respectful of 
everybody in Saskatchewan. You know, it’s being careful with 
our money yet staying on track with our plan. And that is, you 
know, where we’re at. We are on track, and it gives us a strong 
future when people can understand the direction we’re going 
and we live up to the word that we say we are. And so I 
commend her for the hard work to bring in such a great budget. 
 
[16:00] 
 
But you know, sometimes I think we’re better off, Mr. Speaker, 
to not just look at ourselves, to judge ourselves. Sometimes 
we’re better off to ask others. And so I wanted to have a couple 
of quotes in here from a couple of our leaders in the province. 
 
And from Mayor Fougere on April 10th, he’d say, “I’d say 
positive feelings. That’s for sure.” That’s a quote that he said on 
April 10th. And speaking of the grants-in-lieu, “It certainly is a 
great step in the right direction.” And also another quote on the 
grants-in-lieu, “We’re pleased to see a new program that’s 
transparent and predictable for municipalities.” 
 
Mayor Clark out of Saskatoon, who is my mayor, you know, his 

comments were, “Sounds like they heard our message and we 
are able to get to the table, which is really key for the future of 
revenue-sharing as well.” And identified: 
 

And they want to have a thoughtful consultation process in 
the future of revenue-sharing, as cities and communities try 
to create more jobs, try to help to attract investment, try to 
build quality of life. That will make sure we have a strong 
economy in the future and have jobs for the next 
generations coming up. Having that sustainable, 
predictable funding is absolutely critical. 

 
That’s from Mayor Charlie Clark on April 10th at Global. The 
Canadian Taxpayers Federation weighed in as well, and I quote: 
 

I can’t think of any government in all of Canada who is 
actually trimming spending. I don’t know if a government 
has actually slayed a deficit without trimming spending. So 
when you see that spending number coming down, it 
makes you feel good about the future. 

 
And that was from Todd MacKay, prairie director of the 
Canadian Taxpayers Federation. And he also said that on April 
10th to CKRM. 
 
This budget is a strong commitment to the future of 
Saskatchewan. This budget carefully balances spending where 
we see some pressures, and trimming the budget to make sure 
we are getting the best value for taxpayer dollars. Most 
important in this budget is what is not there, Mr. Speaker. All 
the great work done by our Finance minister, and yet it’s what’s 
not in the budget that is so important. What’s not in this budget, 
Mr. Speaker, is a job-killing carbon tax, something this leader 
and this government will not impose on the people of 
Saskatchewan. Those people on that side of the aisle would 
bring in a carbon tax tomorrow if they had their way. 
 
And this budget is in a stark contrast to the NDP’s spending 
promises during their NDP leadership campaign. Nearly every 
day they stand up in the House and they condemn us for 
spending, and to try and manage our books better. Yet their 
spending promises were for $2.5 billion per year, $10 billion 
over the next four years. How would they pay for that? I mean 
they obviously didn’t look into this. 
 
And yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the member for Athabasca said he 
didn’t know where all the money went since Saskatchewan 
Party formed government in 2007. So I’ll gladly provide him 
with a list to remind him of all the great work this government 
has done. 
 
Well where has the money gone, Mr. Speaker? It’s reduced our 
operating debt. It’s tax reductions which have saved people $5.9 
billion, 112,000 people off of the tax rolls, 4.3 billion in 
personal income tax cuts, 1.3 billion in education property tax 
cuts. 
 
In infrastructure, we’ve invested 12.5 billion in infrastructure 
since 2007, 1.4 billion in infrastructure for our health care 
system which includes the children’s hospital, the 15 new 
long-term care facilities, the Moose Jaw Hospital, and the 
Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. Eight billion dollars 
for highways, nearly 1.5 billion to build and repair schools, 1.5 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3879 

billion for Crown capital in 2018. 
 
You know, investments in people, since 2007 a 72 per cent 
increase in health, education, and social services investments: 
750 more doctors, 3,400 more nurses, 8.55 million annual for 
autism services. That’s a 1,600 per cent increase. 2.7 invested in 
mental health and addictions since 2007, and over doubled the 
funding to the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. And most 
everyone in this room knows someone that’s affected by cancer, 
so it’s very relevant to each and every one of us. 
 
Education. Two and a half times more education funding 
compared to 2007. Forty new schools, 25 major renovations, 
840 more teachers since 2007, and created over 8,500 new child 
care spaces. 
 
You know, in Social Services, Mr. Speaker, over 1.18 million 
invested in 2018, a $54 million funding increase since 2017. 
 
Advanced Education. Since 2007 we’ve invested over 9.1 
billion in post-secondary education: 406 million in rebates 
through the graduate retention program for 70,000 graduates, 
and the only graduate retention program in the country; 43.9 
million provided through the Saskatchewan Advantage 
Scholarship, over 90,000 scholarships to approximately 40,000 
students. I hope that reminds the member for Athabasca that 
that’s where we’ve spent our money. There’s more work to do, 
and we’re glad to do that work. 
 
But let’s talk a wee bit about their record. You know, when we 
think of municipalities, the NDP cut nearly 500 million out of 
revenue sharing during their time in office. From 2001 to 2007, 
the number of teachers dropped by 400. They closed 176 
schools, 52 hospitals; they had the longest surgical wait times in 
Canada. Saskatchewan lost 450 nurses, 173 doctors, from 2001 
to 2006. Raised taxes 21 times in 16 years, had the worst job 
creation record in the country, and just half the national rate of 
job growth. The population dropped by 22,000 people from ’96 
to 2007. 
 
And you know, throughout this session we have seen the same 
old NDP, the smear politics and the cherry-picking of statistics. 
And this government on this side rejects and condemns the 
NDP’s plan to increase spending by over 2.5 billion per year, 10 
billion over four years, as it would leave Saskatchewan with an 
extreme deficit which would hurt future generations. We know 
the NDP would implement a carbon tax and raise taxes on 
corporations which have proven to hurt economic growth in 
provinces among many other policy platforms. 
 
Despite the opposition from his own party, the Leader of the 
Opposition stands against pipelines which would increase jobs 
in Saskatchewan as well as be a key factor in alleviating the 
grain backup for Saskatchewan farmers are experiencing. In this 
platform there is no evidence of job and population growth 
incentives. This government will not stand for the NDP taking 
advantage of the Saskatchewan people again and we’ll continue 
to stand up for it on a national level. We will not allow a federal 
government to impose a tax. Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting 
the motion and I will not be supporting the amendment. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’m 
proud to stand in my place and speak in support of the budget 
motion and against the amendment put forward by the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Before I go any further though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I feel I 
must speak about the tragic event that happened on April 6th 
near Nipawin. Words cannot express the heartbreak of losing a 
child, a father, a daughter, a friend, and a teammate. I was at the 
Heart & Stroke Hockey Heroes Weekend when news began to 
break about the accident, and the room went suddenly sombre. 
Everyone in that room looked inward remembering their own 
experiences on a bus, a road trip, or a memorable tournament 
that they shared with their teammates. They’d all been there, 
Mr. Speaker, and in their minds they were there again. 
 
In the days that followed, as the scope of the tragedy was fully 
understood, we saw the backbone and the resilience of the 
Saskatchewan people, whether it was the huge amount of 
money donated, people opening up their homes for friends and 
family of the victims, churches comforting the grieving, or the 
first responders who didn’t know the meaning of the word quit. 
Saskatchewan, Canada, and indeed the world responded. 
 
All of us had a connection to this tragedy; our Finance minister 
had more than most. She’s a remarkable woman, a mother, and 
a grandma, and she’s a remarkable leader. So to the member 
from Humboldt-Watrous, a heartfelt thank you for your 
leadership. All of us know Saskatchewan will persevere. We are 
wounded but we are strong. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we are all 
Humboldt strong. 
 
I have to thank a few people who have helped and encouraged 
me this past year on this journey. First of all, my fiancée, 
DonnaLyn, has continued to be the rock of our family. She’s 
been holding things together while we do the people’s work 
here in Regina. 
 
I’m always the most proud when I get to share in the joys of my 
daughters Abby, Rebecka, and Danielle, whether they’re 
playing soccer, performing at school, or most likely just goofing 
off at home. They’re very enjoyable, Mr. Speaker, and I love 
spending time with them. And then there’s my son Connor who 
works at Canadian Tire and has now decided that he wants to 
become a pilot. So he’s going to be coming and speaking with 
the member from Carrot River to see how maybe not to do 
certain things and how to do certain things. But he’s going to be 
coming to speak with him, and this fall he’s going to enter pilot 
school. 
 
Now my mom is probably watching, not because of who’s 
speaking this afternoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but because she 
just underwent her second hip replace surgery in the last three 
years. So she’s convalescing at home, and she wanted me to 
pass on to the Minister of Health how remarkable the doctors 
that we have in our province are, and the nurses and the support 
staff. She’s had wonderful care. She’s recovering nicely, and 
hopefully she’s watching this and trying to stay awake this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My constituency assistant, Madelaine Fast, is remarkable. She 



3880 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

looks after our office. She gets me to where I need to go with 
the things that I need to bring with me, and so I’m very thankful 
that she’s working with us. It’s not easy, Mr. Deputy Speaker; 
there are some tough things that have to get done. But she’s 
compassionate and she’s got empathy, and she definitely helps 
the people that come into the office that need help, Mr. Speaker. 
And so I want to say thank you to her and encourage her to 
continue what she’s doing. 
 
Now turning to the budget, Mr. Speaker. We’re on track. We’re 
on track to balance the budget next year, and we are unique in 
Canada. We will not kick the can down the road as they have to 
the east and the west of us, Mr. Speaker. We will not continue 
to pile debt onto the credit card for our children and 
grandchildren to pay. And so we’ve made adjustments, and 
those adjustments, Mr. Speaker, have been good adjustments. 
We’ve shifted our reliance away from resource revenue to 
consumption taxes, Mr. Speaker. We’ve controlled spending. 
We’ve made investments in people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just because you say something over and over, Mr. Speaker, 
doesn’t mean that it becomes the truth. When we were in this 
place on April 10th, Mr. Speaker, and we listened to the 
Minister of Finance give her budget address, after that was all 
finished we had the opportunity to listen to the Finance critic, 
Mr. Speaker. And when she stood in her place and said, and I 
quote: 
 

What we were looking for in this budget, what the people 
of Saskatchewan were looking for was four things: a plan, 
hope, inspiration, and leadership. And sadly, Mr. Speaker, 
this budget offers none of those. 

 
When she said that, Mr. Speaker, the expressions on the faces 
of the people in this place were of bewilderment and disbelief. 
Many wondered if she’d even listened to what had just been 
said by the Finance minister. So, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look 
at that statement, and then we’ll take a look at the budget. 
 
[16:15] 
 
A plan. Our government has charted a three-year course to 
reduce our province’s dependency on resource revenue and to 
balance the budget by 2019. This year’s budget keeps that plan 
on track by controlling government spending while making 
important investments in health care, education, and social 
services, where it is most needed. We’re controlling spending 
like reducing vehicle costs by $5 million by reducing the 
number of government-owned vehicles, improved purchase 
prices, and a move to private sector rentals for short-term 
vehicle use. This budget keeps Saskatchewan strong while 
committing to balance in 2019. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is filled with hope. This province is 
filled with hope. Hope, like the $700,000 investment to ensure 
100 per cent coverage of HIV drugs for Saskatchewan people 
and to provide other HIV supports. Hope, like $520,000 for a 
new program to ensure that babies born in Saskatchewan 
hospitals are screened for hearing loss, an investment in our 
children, Mr. Speaker. Hope, like the $2.8 million to fulfill our 
commitment to provide individual funding for children with 
autism spectrum disorder. Initial funding of $4,000 per child 
under the age of six will be provided this year. 

Leadership. Mr. Speaker, our government has been showing 
leadership for 11 years. We’ve invested $1.87 billion in 
education operating funding this year. We’re investing $5.77 
billion in health, $1.3 billion in social services. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s leadership. 
 
Just last week the member from Prince Albert Northcote 
suggested that we talk to our municipal leaders about the 
budget. She was worried that they would have maybe an 
adverse comment on what happened on April 10th, Mr. 
Speaker. And so I took that opportunity and I actually took the 
opportunity to talk to two members of city council, but one is 
very familiar to this place, Mr. Speaker, and especially to the 
opposition. 
 
I went and spoke with Councillor Randy Donauer. And he’s a 
favourite of those members over there as they continually quote 
him and talk about him. And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
Randy Donauer is a vociferous and tireless advocate for the city 
of Saskatoon and for his taxpayers and the people that live in 
his ward. And you know, he makes no apologies for that, and 
I’m proud of him for that. So I went and talked to him and I 
talked to another councillor, Councillor Troy Davies as well 
from ward 4. And you know, we had a great conversation. We 
actually had lunch. And so I talked to them a little bit about the 
budget, and they said, you know, it’s pretty good. It’s pretty 
good, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I shared with them some numbers that they may not have been 
aware of and told them a bit of a story that’s been going on in 
this place for the last little while. And I’d like to share it here in 
this place as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we hear over and over and over that the reason that 
municipal taxes go up in Saskatoon is because of reduced 
provincial government funding. We hear that over and over and 
over, Mr. Speaker. And so I did a little research. I took a look at 
some numbers, and I’ll share some of those numbers with you. 
And in fact I was involved in some of those decisions that we 
made when I was on Saskatoon City Council from 2012 to 
2015. 
 
So in 2010, municipal revenue sharing to the city of Saskatoon 
was just over $29 million. And at that time, city council raised 
property taxes by 3.86 per cent, almost 4 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
The next year, revenue sharing went up to 37, just about $38 
million to the city of Saskatoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the 
city council raised taxes once again almost 4 per cent. So there 
was $8 million more revenue sharing, and the property tax 
increase was about the same.  
 
So the next year, Mr. Speaker, 2012, the revenue sharing 
increased to $42 million and the tax increase was once again 4 
per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Skip ahead now to 2014, where 
the municipal revenue sharing to the city of Saskatoon was 
almost $46 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So that’s in 2014, $46 
million. And we raised property taxes — and I say “we” 
because I was on city council — we raised property taxes 
almost seven and a half per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So as I look at these numbers and I talked to Councillor 
Donauer. I said, so we raised municipal revenue sharing every 
year, and for the first two or three years you kept the property 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3881 

tax increase the same. But then you had a record year in 2014 of 
$46 million, but yet you still raised taxes almost seven and a 
half per cent. That really doesn’t square the circle, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So the more money that is shared with the city of Saskatoon, the 
higher the property tax rate went, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I 
would submit that municipal revenue sharing, and a drop in the 
municipal revenue sharing, doesn’t really correspond to a 
higher percentage of property tax increase, especially in 
Saskatoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think that the numbers just 
don’t lie. 
 
Well speaking about Saskatoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
Saskatoon University in particular, we have something big 
happening here in the next couple of years. And I’m very proud 
of that, and I’m proud of this government for ensuring that the 
insight and the vision was there. I’m talking about the Jim 
Pattison Children’s Hospital of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
opening up next fall. We’re eagerly awaiting it. The number I 
just saw yesterday was it’s 83 per cent complete. Staff is being 
hired, staff is being recruited. 
 
You know, everything is coming together. and that’s because of 
good work by the people at the Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital 
Foundation. They are fantastic. They raise tons of funds, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and they are doing great work. And we’re 
really looking forward to that investment coming to fruition, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s 2019, in October. 
 
It’s in Saskatoon University, but really it’s a provincial hospital 
that’ll look after all of our children, making sure that children 
that are sick, their parents, their siblings, don’t have to travel 
away, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a niece that has some 
challenges and it’s heartbreaking to see them. My brother and 
his family have to take their daughter to Edmonton or Calgary 
or later this year they may be going down to Philadelphia to 
help her become more healthy. And it’ll be a great asset to 
Saskatchewan to have some of those specialities right here at 
home and allow people like my brother and his family get the 
care that they need for Anna right here at home. 
 
Also, you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Saskatoon this 
government has made fantastic investments. And I think about 
the university: just this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, almost $88 
million for the College of Medicine at the U of S to ensure a 
successful college that provides a quality medical education; 
$470 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the U of S, the U of R 
and the federated and affiliated colleges, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We also look at what we’ve been funding in education K to 12 
[kindergarten to grade 12], Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ve had 
four joint schools opening in Saskatoon. We’ve got Sylvia 
Fedoruk School and St. Nicholas Catholic School, Ernest 
Lindner School, and St. Lorenzo Catholic School, Colette 
Bourgonje School, and St. Thérèse Catholic School, as well as 
Chief Whitecap School and St. Kateri, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 
2016 École St. Matthew School received $9.6 million for a 
renovation that was sadly overdue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Georges Vanier, E.D. Feehan, my old alma mater, Holy Cross, 
got a new facelift and, you know, that was almost $19 million, 
Mr. Speaker. So this government has been investing in 
Saskatoon and in the citizens of Saskatoon and the citizens of 

Saskatoon University for the last 11 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and this year’s no different. 
 
We’re on track to get back to balance next year, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, through leadership, through hope, through inspiration, 
and through the hard work of the Saskatchewan people, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We’re not going to stop. We’re going to carry 
down the path that we’re going because we are on track and 
because the Saskatchewan people deserve it, they want it, and 
they demand it. So I will not be supporting the amendment, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, put forward by the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana, and I will be supporting the budget that was presented 
by the Finance minister. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to rise 
this afternoon and enter into this budget debate regarding the 
2018-2019 provincial budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess I would be remiss if I didn’t start out by 
thanking some of those people in my life who allow me to be 
here, but I think I will be brief with those comments, Mr. 
Speaker. Certainly my family plays a role as it does for 
everyone here, but I’d also like to thank the people of Regina 
Lakeview for putting me here in this Assembly, for showing 
faith in me. And I want them to know that I do take very 
seriously the responsibility that sits with all members in this 
place, Mr. Speaker, and that is to bring their concerns, their 
hopes for their families but also for our province forward and 
enter them into the record here in this House, and also to 
advocate for those things that they see that need righting, Mr. 
Speaker. And so I do thank them for that responsibility, and I 
take it very seriously. 
 
I also take very seriously, Mr. Speaker, my role as critic — my 
role as critic for Education, my role as critic for early learning 
and child care, my role for critic of Agriculture, and my role for 
critic of Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation, Mr. 
Speaker. And I thank those people around the province who put 
their trust in us, who come forward with their hopes, their 
thoughts, and their concerns, and who entrust us to bring their 
voice to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And I think that 
sometimes the role of opposition is not appreciated, but there is 
certainly a role there, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that those voices 
come forward in this place. 
 
Of course you get a certain spin with a budget, Mr. Speaker. I 
think a lot of people on the surface think that budgets are, you 
know, all about facts and figures, charts and tables, Mr. 
Speaker, sort of dry accounting procedures. But certainly I 
mean there are facts and figures, Mr. Speaker, but they are also 
. . . They’re important but they’re also inherently political. The 
budget document, you know, particularly is an inherently 
political document, not only in the spin that we see put on this 
budget but also in the decisions that are made within that 
budget, Mr. Speaker — those decisions of who has favour, who 
receives support for their concerns, for their . . . which 
ministries see support and which don’t, which are highlighted, 
which are not, which voices are brought forward and listened 
to, Mr. Speaker, and are not. Those are all inherently political 
decisions and I think they’re worth unpacking, some of the 
decisions that were made in this budget. 



3882 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

Of course decisions, as I’ve said, in the budget are inherently 
political. Budgets favour some and too often they punish others. 
Mr. Speaker, I think that sometimes that punishment is 
deliberate and clear. I think of the film tax credit, a decision 
made by this government against the advice and wishes of the 
whole film industry, made against the advice of the chamber of 
commerce, and a choice that saw the Sask Party government 
willingly and deliberately turning their backs on tens of millions 
of dollars of revenue, the cultural vibrancy and the ability to tell 
our own stories and to gain understanding that comes with a 
thriving film industry, and a choice that has decimated, Mr. 
Speaker, a thriving, a once-vibrant film industry in our 
province, seeing families and individuals leave our province for 
employment elsewhere. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that decision has also impacted the 
sound stage, a state-of-the-art facility not far from this 
Assembly contained in the constituency of Regina Lakeview, 
underutilized and now we see under the shade of potentially a 
for sale sign, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:30] 
 
And I think that was a shameful and deliberate decision, and I 
offer it up as an example of one of those decisions that is meant 
to punish a whole industry for reasons that I don’t know that are 
completely clear. This despite the fact that even when awash in 
evidence that this decision would be counter to even the 
government’s own stated goals of diversifying the economy, 
shifting our dependence on resource royalty, and keeping 
Saskatchewan families in our province, even despite all of that 
evidence, this decision went ahead, Mr. Speaker. And I think 
that there are other examples of this type of punitive budget and 
policy-making by this government, but I offer that one up as a 
shining, unfortunately, example. 
 
But I would submit, Mr. Speaker, that many budget choices that 
are formulated by this government have not come out of a 
punitive desire, but from ignorance in the literal sense, Mr. 
Speaker, not knowing or understanding the impacts of their 
choices, and from being profoundly out of touch with the 
realities that are facing so many individuals and families in our 
province. In the end, whether a government sets out to 
deliberately harm or punish a group or sector in their budget 
making, or if the harm comes because that government failed to 
listen, the impact is the same. 
 
Whether they failed to take a reasonable view of reality, failed 
to take a long-term, or in some cases, even a short- or 
medium-term view, forecasting of how that decision would play 
out; failed to listen to their own officials, their own ministries, 
their own stakeholders; failed to listen to voices in the sector; 
failed to listen to voices on the front line; or failed to listen to 
those who receive the service, it really doesn’t matter, Mr. 
Speaker, because the harm that that group or individual or 
family or community experiences is real, regardless of intent. 
 
We’re taught very early on, Mr. Speaker — I think something I 
tried to teach my own children — you’re responsible not only 
for your intent, but you’re responsible for the impact, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think the same goes for budgets. 
 
And every day I know that members on this side of the House 

. . . I suspect because I see the cc’s on the letters of members 
opposite . . . Every day we hear from people in this province 
who have been harmed by choices made by this government, 
Mr. Speaker, this budget and past budgets. 
 
And of course we don’t hear that in the budget document. We 
don’t hear that in the budget speeches from members opposite. 
To listen to these members, Mr. Speaker, you’d think that 
nothing has ever been better in this province. I know some 
members on this side are fond of saying that it’s as if the sun 
. . . the skies opened up and the sun started shining in this 
province in 2007, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Ms. Beck: — Yes, and they’re clapping for themselves, as I 
suppose is predictable, Mr. Speaker. And I think that belies the 
reality, the long history of this province, the history of people in 
this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, but the longer history of this 
province, a history going back well before contact, before 
European contact, Mr. Speaker. So I would caution the 
members opposite not to clap too loudly for themselves and 
maybe go read a history book or something along those lines, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think that part of the reason that we . . . We hit a nerve there, 
Mr. Speaker. I think that part of the reason that we see this 
bravado, this out-of-touch talk by members opposite, I think 
that there’s a certain trap that governments fall into after 
they’ve been in government for a long time, Mr. Speaker. You 
tend to start reading your own press and stop talking to people 
out in your communities. You start to believe your own hype, 
Mr. Speaker. And that’s, unless you actively work against that 
trap, Mr. Speaker, that’s something that governments can fall 
into, and I’m hearing increasingly that being the case. I know 
you kind of get comfortable at the tables and the mixers and the 
receptions, and you hear from people, you know, who are in 
positions of power and you forget that there’s a whole world out 
there, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t want to paint too wide of a 
brush, Mr. Speaker, but that certainly is a trap that’s out there if 
you don’t actively work against it. 
 
And sometimes when I hear member after member on that side 
standing up and saying, you know, how things have never been 
better, clapping for themselves about what’s happening in 
education, for what’s happening across the province, you know 
. . . Not to say everything is doom and gloom, Mr. Speaker, but 
understanding that the more that you present a picture that fails 
to reflect the reality of people’s lives, the more they’re going to 
push back, the more they’re going to push back and say, but this 
is how it’s happening in my household. This is what’s 
happening in my community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would just caution this government and any other 
government to not believe their own hype too much and to read 
a little broader than their own prepared notes and their own 
press releases, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government tells us that they’re on track. That’s written on 
the front page of this budget document. Again they’re clapping 
for themselves, Mr. Speaker. But on track to where, I think, is a 
pertinent question. One of the things that, I think, I suspect the 
members opposite would tell us is that they’re on track to 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3883 

balance the budget by next year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are practical and of course 
they want to see us live within our means. But Saskatchewan 
people also know that this is a government that inherited a 
booming province, inherited a balanced budget with a surplus, 
inherited a province that was growing. And despite all that and 
a decade of record resource revenue, this is a government that 
has failed to balance eight out of the last 11 budgets, Mr. 
Speaker. So I think Saskatchewan people would be forgiven if 
they waited to see the evidence with regard to whether or not 
this government can manage to get back on budget, Mr. 
Speaker  . . . The member for Cannington is heckling from his 
chair. I hope that he gets a chance to stand up and enter his 
thoughts into the record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a government that has steadily added to our 
public debt. Operating debt has been growing steadily since 
2015. They’ve piled debt on our Crowns. They’ve locked us 
into costly P3 [public-private partnership] contracts that not 
only will we be paying, but our children will be left to deal 
with, Mr. Speaker. Total debt will grow to over $25 billion, Mr. 
Speaker, by 2020, and that’s using the government’s own 
numbers. And the cost of servicing this debt, Mr. Speaker, will 
also grow as is reasonably to be expected. 
 
But they want us to trust them. They want us to trust them that 
they’ve got this, despite the evidence through the best years 
they couldn’t balance the budget, that they’re going to be able 
to do it this time, Mr. Speaker. And I guess we’ll see. We’ll see 
next year. 
 
And if those listening along at home, if they want to look in 
their budget books or look it up online, these numbers are on 
page 48. They’re in black and white. The graph is in green, 
perhaps should be in red. Mr. Speaker, this is what we’re 
leaving to those who will come after us, a debt like we’ve never 
seen in this province, Mr. Speaker. And this after enjoying a 
decade of record resource revenue. 
 
That’s part of the track that this government is on, Mr. Speaker, 
and it’s a pretty straightforward track here certainly since 2012. 
And instead of believing that the sun started shining in 2007, 
that the Sask Party can do no wrong, I think it’s important to 
take real stock of the reality and the track that many 
Saskatchewan families are on in this province, those families 
that have no voice when you hear the statements and the budget 
responses of members opposite. 
 
I’m afraid that this government is showing increasing signs of 
being in the state that I mentioned earlier, that state of, you 
know, rubbing cozy shoulders with those who tell you what you 
want to hear and losing touch with those who are actually 
experiencing the fallout from the decisions that you’re making 
in your budgets. To use a baseball analogy, Mr. Speaker, some 
people are born on third base and go through life acting like 
they’ve hit a triple. I think we’ve got a government, Mr. 
Speaker, on that side who’s pretty sure that when they got in 
government that they hit that triple, and they were actually left 
in a situation where they were on third base. 
 
And I can see why, you know, they had some pretty good years 
at the beginning, Mr. Speaker: lots of funding, lots of resource 

revenue coming in. The provincial nominee program continued 
to tick along and ensure that we had immigration to the 
province, Mr. Speaker. And times were pretty good. And to be 
fair, you know, they made some investments and they made 
some early choices. I’m going to have to think back to some of 
the investments. The SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for 
disability] program for people who have disabilities, enduring 
disabilities, certainly was one of those programs, Mr. Speaker, 
and there were some choices along the way. 
 
But I think the problem when you’re standing on third base and 
you think that you hit a triple is that you might not have the 
skills or the ability to manage things when times aren’t so good, 
Mr. Speaker. And I think we certainly saw that with . . . Last 
year’s budget was a glaring example of that, Mr. Speaker, but 
we were seeing signs of that a few years back. 
 
One of the things I want to spend some time on is the education 
portion of this budget. Much has been made by members 
opposite of the promise for $30 million to be invested into 
education. Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard people say that it’s a start. 
I’ve certainly heard the minister say that it’s a start and the 
Premier. It is a start. It does not go very far, especially when 
you compare that up to the fact that there were $54 million cut 
out of education last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But lest people forget or think that that was the first difficult 
budget that boards were faced with in this province, it’s not the 
case. We’ve seen underfunding for growth in this province 
going back a number of years, boards being forced to swallow 
up that cost to that growth within their own budgets. And then 
we saw in 2014 in fact, Mr. Speaker, just a few months after oil 
prices took a downturn and after this government had never 
properly funded growth, we saw this government have the 
audacity to ask for money back from school boards, Mr. 
Speaker. And I guess I shouldn’t be too surprised because that’s 
something we’ve seen, the Ministry of Advanced Education 
actually claw back funds mid-year from universities in our 
province a couple of years in a row, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The impacts of that underfunding are very real. They are 
intense. They are intense of course for those families and those 
students who don’t have the supports that they need in the 
classroom. But I would submit to you, Mr. Speaker, that those 
impacts will be intense for this province going forward for 
many years. There are critical years that children have with 
regard to development. There are years when our investment in 
their education and supporting young children has the most 
benefit to those children and has the most impact in terms of 
returns on dollars investment across the lifespan. 
 
I’m going to read, Mr. Speaker, into the record some comments 
from 2016, Saskatchewan’s Early Years Plan, Mr. Speaker, 
because it is quite a lovely document actually. The opening 
paragraph reads as follows: 
 

The Government of Saskatchewan’s vision for our 
province is to be the best place in Canada to raise children. 
To support this vision, we have developed . . . [this plan so 
that] all children can be safe, healthy and develop to their 
full potential in strong families and supportive 
communities. 
 



3884 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2018 

Mr. Speaker, members on this side could not agree more. We 
need to ensure that those supports are in place. But the reality 
is, and you won’t hear this from members opposite, is that we 
are failing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the budget I have been trying to be quite 
diligent about getting around and talking to school boards, 
talking to parents, talking to stakeholders in all of my critic 
areas around the province. I had the opportunity to meet with 
one school board yesterday, who sent me a very nice chart, Mr. 
Speaker, just showing the impact of year-over-year 
underfunding within their school division, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:45] 
 
An Hon. Member: — Table it. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Well the member . . . I’ll table it, for sure. Mr. 
Speaker, this can be shared with all members. This graph shows 
a decrease, year over year, going back from $12,000 per-student 
funding, reducing to 12 in 2016-17, reducing down to 11 this 
year. This is a school division that is experiencing growth. The 
funding, even within the $30 million, I think they’ll receive 
about $15,000, Mr. Speaker, and it will not keep pace with the 
growth. So we’ll see another reduction this year as a result of 
this budget in year-over-year funding. That’s certainly 
something that we’re hearing from the SSBA [Saskatchewan 
School Boards Association]. The year-over-year reduction in 
per-student funding is on track, Mr. Speaker, and that track is 
going down year after year after year. 
 
I was told by one board member yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that 
we have trimmed all the fat; we’re cutting bone now, Mr. 
Speaker, and that those are the choices that have been made. 
This is where we have chosen to balance the budget — on the 
backs of our children — and really is a short-sighted plan on the 
part of this government. 
 
We look at the end returns on dollar, and a dollar invested 
across the lifespan. We know that there are . . . making sure that 
children get a . . . I’m going to read from the document again: 
 

Making sure all children get a . . . start in life leads to a 
better quality of life for Saskatchewan people. It reduces 
the risk of poverty and improves school readiness, health 
and wellness. It also reduces employment and education 
gaps for First Nations and Métis people and improves 
graduation rates and lifelong success for all citizens. It is 
estimated that one dollar invested in a high quality early 
years program can result in a return of $4 to $9 over the 
lifespan of the child. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we are failing to make that investment, despite 
evidence from this government’s own document to the contrary. 
We have far to go. Interestingly, some of these advantages of 
investing in early years education mirror the government’s own 
stated goal within the ed sector plan. But we’re failing. We’re 
failing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are failing to ensure that we are mindful of the gap in 
achievement between First Nations and non-First Nations 
students in this province, Mr. Speaker. I think that school 
boards and teachers, parents are doing an admirable job, but the 

fact is that the difference in condition that children across our 
province face is also reflected in the gap that we see in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when we see things like a reduction in supports for housing; 
suspension of programs; an assumption, somehow an 
assumption by this government that because vacancy rates are 
falling, that therefore instead of actually going out and looking 
at Kijiji or whatever method you might want to look for an 
apartment in a certain jurisdiction, assuming that because the 
vacancy rate is falling, that rents are also falling. Mr. Speaker, 
that is a fallacy. It’s simply not the case, but yet we’re basing 
policy on it, and that’s unfortunate. It has very real implications 
for families, families who are increasingly struggling to make 
ends meet. 
 
Of course on track also means we’re still on track to have PST 
applied to children’s clothing; on track that PST is still applied 
to restaurant meals, to construction; that we are on track to see 
increasing power bills as we have had so many times in the last 
several years, Mr. Speaker. And all of that is cutting into 
families’ and individuals’ ability to make ends meet, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Recently I surprisingly came across a statistic with regard to 
mortgages in arrears in this country. I think this is very telling 
and frankly disturbing evidence when we see that 
Saskatchewan’s default rate — mortgages in arrears more than, 
I believe it’s three, and it might be four months — is three times 
the national average. That is a sign of people being stretched to 
the limit, Mr. Speaker. And we see a government who seems 
rather indifferent to that. 
 
This government likes to talk about . . . We had a minister, a 
previous minister of Education who talked about the most 
important matrix in education being the number of children in 
our schools. Mr. Speaker, I cannot begin to start with how 
wrong-headed that is. I mean certainly this government likes to 
pat themselves on the back with regard to population numbers, 
with regard to the number of children in our schools. And I 
understand that to some degree, Mr. Speaker, but if you’re 
patting yourself on the back for bringing in and for having 
increased numbers in this province, surely you must also have 
some responsibility to ensure that there are actually services 
available for those students, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as we’ve seen by the graph — and I’ll show graphs from 
other school divisions — there is instead a decreasing 
investment in students in our province, Mr. Speaker. So 
apparently it is more important to this government to have 
bodies in the building rather than actually provide support for 
those people. And I think that’s unfortunate, and we’re seeing 
the impact of that. 
 
The capital side, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to go back to the 
budget document. This government likes to talk a lot about — 
and certainly they have put a fair amount of money into — 
capital builds. Of course when your student population is 
growing, I think Saskatoon’s population is growing at about the 
rate of two or three medium- to larger-sized elementary schools 
a year. Regina’s at a slightly smaller rate. We have jurisdictions 
like Moose Jaw, where they’re seeing about 100 students per 
year increase. You will have need for additional schools at a 



April 17, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3885 

certain point there. 
 
There was some funding made available in this budget for 
capital, but I think that there will be a lot of very disappointed 
communities around this province, Mr. Speaker, when they look 
at the long-term forecasting for the capital plan in this province. 
We see this year $26 million of course for the Weyburn and 
Rosthern schools, which I am sure that people in those 
communities . . . And I know from people in those communities 
is appreciated, Mr. Speaker. So don’t say that I’m not grateful 
for any of that. 
 
We see, if my math is correct here, about $4 million going into 
the joint-use schools, Mr. Speaker. And they’ve really taken up 
a lot of room in this budget, Mr. Speaker, year over year, but we 
look forward to next year. And this is where there are going to 
be a lot of disappointed folks out there, Mr. Speaker, because 
we have a plan for next year for $36 million. There are a lot of 
schools on that capital priority list around this province. 
 
With a side note, it is increasingly difficult to find that capital 
priority list, and there has been a complete retreat of 
transparency around the capital funding allocations in this 
province. You used to be able to go onto the ministry and find a 
full accounting of all of the submissions by school boards: 
when they were submitted, under which category they were 
submitted, the total cost of the project, the priority. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s difficult to find now. The last time I saw the 
priority list it was a word document that just listed the top 10 
capital projects. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of people on that list who are 
hoping. They have some significant needs. We have schools, I 
know that have been waiting for a long time, that have been 
promised consolidations, where we have roofs falling in in 
gyms. We have leaky roofs. We have overcrowding, Mr. 
Speaker, and I don’t see a plan here to address that. I see $36 
million next year. I see $12 million the subsequent year — 
which doesn’t buy you a school these days, Mr. Speaker — and 
$10 million in subsequent years. 
 
So those who have been promised tacitly that they will be 
seeing something perhaps next year, I would caution them to 
look at that capital spending plan. Because if it stands, those 
buildings will not be there, and we will continue to see 
deterioration of facilities and overcrowding, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is something that I want to read in the record 
because I keep hearing time after time how great things are in 
education from members opposite. They seem not to want to 
hear. The realities are out there. I know that the ministers have 
been copied on some of these families reaching out, you know, 
in all-caps letters trying to make the minister understand that if 
my child loses their pre-K [pre-kindergarten] program this year 
— which we saw happen and sustained this year for many 
children — they lose those gaps. They lose that critical window 
in which the most progress can be made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m looking for . . . I want to end with the words 
of one of the parents here. I’m just looking for that. Members 
opposite don’t want to hear from this parent, but I think it is 
really important that we do:  
 

I just want to say [and this is to one of the school directors, 
Mr. Speaker] I want to thank you for all of your hard work 
that you’ve been doing. I know you’ve fought hard for 
these programs, and that decision was forced upon you by 
the government. 
 
A group of parents will be rallying today to show our 
support for the board. This rob-Peter-to-pay-Paul approach 
the government is suggesting isn’t going to work, and we 
all know it. I don’t envy you the job that you have to do 
right now, and I want you to know that my letters are 
personal. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these parents know where the responsibility for 
these cuts lie. It is not with the school boards, as so many times 
we’ve saw this government have invitation to blame the school 
boards. These cuts lay solely with this government, Mr. 
Speaker. And they are not fooling the folks out there by 
suggesting otherwise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that with that there’s so much more that I 
would like to say, but I do think that I should give others a 
chance to enter into this debate, Mr. Speaker. I will continue 
with my conversations and bringing the voices of those in the 
community forward within my critic area and within Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
I can say with full certainty that my constituents would want me 
to vote against the budget motion as proposed by the Minister 
of Finance and vote in favour of the amendment as proposed by 
the critic. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 5 p.m., this House stands 
recessed . . . You want a minute? No. This House stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. tonight. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3855 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3855 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3855 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3855 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3855 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3855 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3856 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3856 
  Dennis ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3856, 3858 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3856 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3856 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3857 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3857 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3857 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3858 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Francis ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3858 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3858 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3858 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3859 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Second Annual Saskatchewan Construction Week 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3859 
 Saskatoon Theatre Production Explores Homelessness 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3859 
 Moose Jaw Health Foundation Celebration 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3859 
 Regina Ski Club Embraces Winter 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3860 
 Saskatchewan Welcomes 233 New Canadian Citizens 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3860 
 Birthday Tea Celebrates Long-Lived Residents 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3860 
 Jansen Mine Strikes Potash 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3860 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Provincial Sales Tax on Used Vehicles 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3861 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3861 
 Saskatoon Bypass 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3862 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3862 
 Programming for Special Needs Students 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3862 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3862 
 Funding for Children With Autism 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3863 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3863 
 Funding for Post-Secondary Education 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3864 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3864 
 Emissions Reduction and Renewable Energy Targets 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3865 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3865 
 Emissions Reduction and Provincial Tax Rates  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3865 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3866 
 Land Acquisitions for Regina Bypass 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3866 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3866 
 



 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 123 — The Snowmobile (Fees) Amendment Act, 2018 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3867 
 Bill No. 124 — The Environmental Management and Protection (Environmental Handling Charges) 
 Amendment Act, 2018 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3867 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3867 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3869 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3873 
  Francis ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3875 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3877 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3879 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3881 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


