


















































March 26, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 34A  MONDAY, MARCH 26, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3589 
 March 26, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much to my colleagues and 
thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of this 
Saskatchewan Assembly, some very special guests that are with 
us today. With us today, Mr. Speaker, is Ambassador David 
Wilkins, who has served as Saskatchewan’s representative in 
Washington, DC [District of Columbia] for nearly a decade 
now. Welcome. 
 
The ambassador is accompanied today by Christy Cox and 
Justin Meyers, who work alongside the ambassador in 
Washington, DC. Welcome to the Saskatchewan legislature. 
Our guests are in Regina for meetings with government 
officials. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s been said that effective diplomats should 
be analytical, good writers, verbally fluent, and willing to 
accept dangerous assignments. Well in 2005 Ambassador 
Wilkins was given the dangerous assignment of representing 
the United States in the great city of Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. He 
would later tell a reporter that being named Ambassador to 
Canada was the greatest honour of his life. He said, and I quote, 
“I woke up every morning thinking okay, big boy, you’re 
representing the United States. Don’t screw it up.” Mr. Speaker, 
it reminds me of some comments of the member from 
Athabasca from time to time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, he did not screw it up. Mr. Wilkins has done 
an excellent job as ambassador. It certainly helped that he 
brought long experience in government to that job. Mr. Wilkins 
served 25 years in the South Carolina House of Representatives, 
including 11 years as Speaker of the House. Mr. Speaker, you 
have a few years to go. 
 
But also important was the fact that the ambassador possesses a 
genial disposition, an open mind, and a warm heart. Upon 
arriving in Ottawa, he launched a Southern charm offensive on 
the Canadians, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the ambassador 
travelled across this country building strong relations with 
provincial leaders, including our former premier of this 
province. 
 

And I should point out that the ambassador was, and is, a 
steadfast supporter of our Armed Forces. He visited our troops 
on the front lines in Afghanistan, and we are grateful for the 
compassion that he showed Canadian women and men serving 
alongside Americans in the cause for freedom. 
 
After his diplomatic service, Mr. Wilkins joined the law firm 
Nelson Mullins, where he was hired to serve as our 
representative in the US [United States] capital of Washington, 
DC. And, Mr. Speaker, the United States is our closest friend. 
They are our largest trading partner, and we need someone 
capable and knowledgeable to advance our relations with that 
trading partner in Washington, DC. 
 
Unlike other provinces, including our neighbour to the west, 
Saskatchewan does not have a permanent trade office in 
Washington. We have something much better, Mr. Speaker. We 
have Ambassador Wilkins, and I think he has done a superb job 
in this role representing our province. He has provided excellent 
insight and advice to the Government of Saskatchewan, and the 
ambassador is a well-known and well-connected businessman 
in the US capital. 
 
This was demonstrated on Premier Wall’s most recent mission 
to Washington. The premier met with Commerce Secretary 
Wilbur Ross, Energy Secretary Rick Perry, as well as EPA 
[Environmental Protection Agency] Director Scott Pruitt, 
among other senior officials. The ambassador helped secure 
those meetings, and we’re thankful. We’re very thankful for 
that effort. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also important to note that Ambassador 
Wilkins is a huge football fan. His second-favourite team is the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders, and it’s right after the Clemson 
Tigers. Mr. Speaker, I don’t know whether the ambassador 
hums the “Tiger Rag” in his sleep, but it wouldn’t surprise any 
of us. These last few years have been good years for the Tigers 
and we certainly wish them well in the season ahead. And we 
accept the reciprocal well wishes for our Saskatchewan 
Roughriders, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province have been well served 
by Ambassador Wilkins and his team, and we are pleased, our 
relationship with Nelson Mullins will continue for years to 
come. 
 
I would ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
welcoming our guests to this legislature today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join the 
Premier in offering my words of welcome to the ambassador 
and his colleagues. I’m glad to see them here today and want to 
thank the ambassador for his service to the people of his nation 
and of ours as he has worked through the years to make sure 
that that relationship between our closest neighbour and friend, 
the United States of America and Canada, that that is a positive 
relationship working for the best of the people of both nations. 
Thank you, and ask the members to please join me in 
welcoming him to our Legislative Assembly. 
 



3590 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2018 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to all the members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce a 
long-time friend of mine, Raj Verma, seated in the west gallery, 
Mr. Speaker. He’s a very good, successful businessman in 
Regina, visiting this Assembly with his younger brother 
Narinder Verma, who is from Chicago, here today. 
 
I would like to ask all the members to join me in welcoming 
them in this Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. Thanks. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s my honour to introduce guests that are seated 
in your legislature here today. I have my little sister, Shauna 
Weninger, that’s here today. She’s a mortgage broker, an 
amazing mom, gives me lots of good advice as well. She’s 
joined by her husband, my brother-in-law Grant Weninger. 
He’s a great fishing partner. We’ve been on many expeditions 
all through the North. He’s a real moose on the portage, can 
carry his weight in cargo, Mr. Speaker. He’s not much of a 
fisherman, but a really good guy. 
 
And it’s my honour to welcome a courageous young man, my 
nephew Nolan, eight-year-old Nolan, grade 2 over at St. 
Josaphat here in Regina. He’s my hiking and hunting and 
fishing partner, a pretty cool little guy and a courageous little 
guy who lives with epilepsy, overcomes so many challenges. 
And I ask all members to welcome him to his Assembly here 
today on Purple Day, a day to recognize those living with 
epilepsy and to work for a better tomorrow. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise to present petitions on behalf of a very important heritage 
industry in Saskatchewan, that being trapping, as well as the 
trappers across our province who are certainly important to our 
province, incredible knowledge keepers of our land. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Saskatchewan government to immediately show their 
support for Saskatchewan trappers and provide a trapping 
licence exemption for Saskatchewan residents over 65 
years of age. 

 
These petitions today are signed by citizens of Regina. I so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to rise once again today to present a 
petition from citizens who are opposed to this current Liberal 
federal government’s carbon tax. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read 

the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on our 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, and the petition is signed by citizens of Glenbush 
and Medstead. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition calling on the government to stop the cuts to our 
children’s already strained classrooms. Those who have signed 
this petition today wish to draw our attention to the following: 
to the fact that despite taking in an additional $67 million in 
education property tax, last year this government saw fit to cut 
$54 million from our children’s classrooms. Of course, Mr. 
Speaker, those type of cuts don’t come without very difficult 
consequences, including cuts to busing for kindergarten 
students, as well as cuts to important preschool programs for 
children with special needs. Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the government to reverse the senseless cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms and stop making families, teachers, and 
everyone who works to support our education system pay 
the price for the Sask Party’s mismanagement, scandal, and 
waste. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
Saskatoon and Strasbourg. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour for 
me to stand here today and present a petition for a second 
bridge for Prince Albert: that the Diefenbaker bridge in Prince 
Albert is the primary link that connects the southern part of the 
province to the North, and that the need for a second bridge for 
Prince Albert has never been clearer than it is today. 
 
Prince Albert, communities north of Prince Albert, and 
businesses that send people and products through Prince Albert 
require a solution; and that local municipal governments have 
limited resources and require a second bridge to be funded 
through federal and provincial governments and not a P3 
[public-private partnership] model; and that the Saskatchewan 
Party government refuses to stand up for Prince Albert and this 
critical infrastructure issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 



March 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3591 

commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing these petitions come from 
the cities of Regina and Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical workplace supports for 
survivors of domestic violence. This is a very serious issue in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, as Saskatchewan has the highest 
rates of intimate partner violence amongst provinces in the 
country. Saskatchewan, as we know, must do much more to 
protect survivors of domestic violence. 
 
And for many who experience domestic violence, the violence 
will follow them to their workplace. Employers need to take 
every reasonable precaution in the workplace to protect workers 
who are survivors of domestic violence. And that accounts for 
some of the measures that the government did take on after we 
suggested them in a private member’s bill, Mr. Speaker, last 
session. However, one of the pieces that the government refused 
to pass, which is being called on by these petitioners, is a 
measure allowing for five days of paid leave be made available 
to workers who are survivors of intimate-partner violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is very important. It’s been called on by those 
who are experts in this area, those who are working on the front 
lines in this area and see the importance of ensuring that we’re 
doing everything we can to ensure that those who are fleeing 
domestic violence are able to retain and continue on with their 
employment while they’re transitioning to a safer living 
situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Saskatchewan Party government to pass legislation to 
ensure critical supports in the workplace, including 
reasonable accommodation and paid and unpaid leave for 
survivors of domestic violence. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today 
come from Regina and Strasbourg. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Saskatoon Regional Economic Development Authority  
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Thursday, March 
8th, I, along with several MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] and over 500 other people, attended the Saskatoon 
Regional Economic Development Authority’s annual economic 
forum at TCU Place. It was an inspiring event, reminding 
everyone in attendance just how outstanding Saskatoon is in its 
commitment to innovative economic development. The 
conference covered a variety of sectors and topics, including 

agriculture, technology, urban development, entrepreneurship, 
clean energy, Aboriginal economic development, research and 
innovation, and creative culture. 
 
This forum is just one of many methods of the organization’s 
community outreach. SREDA [Saskatoon Regional Economic 
Development Authority] sends a daily newsletter providing 
informative links to business and economic news relevant to 
Saskatoon and to the province at large. SREDA also recently 
released a video, The Saskatoon I Know. Based on a poem 
written by talented wordsmith and SREDA CEO [chief 
executive officer] Alex Fallon, the video details the advantages 
of living in a city as exceptional as Saskatoon. 
 
[13:45] 
 
And this is what makes SREDA such a valuable institution: its 
devotion to economic development has had a measurable 
impact that they’re only committed to increasing. Their 2015 to 
2018 strategy Growing, Together aims to make SREDA the 
best economic development agency in the country. Their goals 
for 2018 include a $45 million impact from SREDA’s programs 
and services and $16 million in business and investment 
attractions. Saskatoon is fortunate to have such a competitive 
and passionate economic agency like SREDA at the helm. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 

Federation of Sovereign Indigenous Nations Youth 
Legislative Assembly 

 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last week 
the member from Melville-Saltcoats, along with the member 
from Meewasin and the mayor of Saskatoon, attended FSIN 
[Federation of Sovereign Indigenous Nations] Youth 
Legislative Assembly on Treaty 6 territory in Saskatoon. 
 
The FSIN promotes the inclusion of youth voices and 
recognizes the strength and potential that youth have in our 
province. The youth assembly is one way to achieve this. 
During the assembly there was an election to appoint new male 
and female FSIN youth representatives. Darian Lonechild of the 
White Bear First Nations won the female youth representative 
position. She replaces Cheyenne Fineday of Witchekan Lake 
Cree Nation on Treaty 6. Rollin Baldhead of One Arrow First 
Nation won the male youth representative position. He replaces 
Andre Bear of Little Pine and Canoe Lake First Nations.  
 
I want to take a moment to thank Cheyenne and Andre for the 
fine work as youth representatives and to congratulate Darian 
and Rollin on their election wins. 
 
Mr. Speaker, around 300 students and youth attended the FSIN 
youth assembly this year. There were powerful and inspiring 
presentations from Erica Lee who talked about justice and 
promoting the ongoing resilience among indigenous peoples, 
members from the Aboriginal youth entrepreneurship program 
showcasing their products and services, and Fond-du-Lac crash 
survivor Lyman Fern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the FSIN youth assembly is a fantastic way to 
ensure youth are included in the important work FSIN does. 



3592 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2018 

Our youth in the province are leaders of today. On behalf of 
everyone in this Assembly, I want to thank FSIN and everyone 
who helped make this event such a success. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Purple Day Increases Awareness  
of Epilepsy 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
Assembly in recognition of Purple Day, the international day of 
awareness for epilepsy. Founded in 2008, Purple Day is an 
international grassroots effort dedicated to increasing awareness 
about epilepsy worldwide. On this date annually, people in 
countries around the globe are invited to wear purple and attend 
events in support of epilepsy awareness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are more than 10,000 people in our province 
with epilepsy. My nephew Nolan is one of those 10,000 people. 
I’m incredibly proud of Nolan and the thousands of other 
Saskatchewan people and families who bravely face the 
challenges that epilepsy presents. As a province, we must do so 
much better for those living with epilepsy. We must act to 
ensure access to needed medications, medical professionals, and 
supports. 
 
Currently the Royal University Hospital, along with the 
Saskatchewan epilepsy program, is leading an important 
initiative to ensure equipment that is required during brain 
surgery that will ensure much better outcomes for patients. This 
is very important, but frankly this should be funded publicly, 
not left to charity. 
 
And so I ask members to join with me in recognizing Purple 
Day and committing to action to ensure those living with 
epilepsy have the highest quality of life possible. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Gender Diversity Week 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
week marks Gender Diversity Week here in Saskatchewan. It’s 
a great opportunity to inspire, inform, and educate the people of 
Saskatchewan on the challenges faced by members of the sex- 
and gender-diverse community, and to celebrate the 
accomplishments and the diversity of the people living and 
contributing to this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hosted by the TransSask Support Services, the 
genderqueer flag will be raised tomorrow at Regina City Hall in 
its honour. TransSask has an incredible lineup of events and 
workshops this week, including co-hosting a makeup and chill 
event with the U of R [University of Regina] Pride Centre on 
Wednesday. This group is so important to our growing and 
diverse society, and their courage and continued efforts are 
being felt all over Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a reminder that we must continue our efforts 
to promote equality for all, as there is absolutely no place for 
discrimination in our province. I encourage all members in this 

Assembly to attend the events that will be held by TransSask 
Support Services this week throughout the city and throughout 
the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members please join me in 
continuing to stand up for the rights of all individuals in 
Saskatchewan and wish the TransSask Support Services well on 
a great week of awareness and education. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. March is 
Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month, and I want to remind 
members of the importance of early detection for the 
second-most commonly diagnosed form of cancer for 
Saskatchewan men, and the third-most common for women. 
 
This disease has greatly affected my family, as my mother lost 
her battle with cancer at a very early age and my brother is 
currently fighting this disease. I am certain that almost everyone 
in this Assembly knows someone that has been affected by 
cancer in their communities and understand the importance of 
prevention. In any given year, more than 800 new cases are 
diagnosed in this province. When detected early, colorectal 
cancer can be successfully prevented or treated in 90 per cent of 
cases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, building on the success of other screening 
programs, the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency launched the 
screening program for colorectal cancer in 2009 and has since 
expanded across this province. The Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency asks that men or women between 50 and 74 years old 
contact the agency if they have not received a testing kit within 
the past two years. 
 
Our government is pleased to continue funding the Cancer 
Agency to ensure that life-saving services like this screening 
program are available for all Saskatchewan people. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

First Nation Opens New Band Office 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
month the community of Little Pine First Nation came together 
to celebrate the opening of a brand new band office. Little Pine 
is situated about 20 miles north of Cut Knife in the constituency 
of Cut Knife-Turtleford where they have a great MLA. 
 
Songs, food, and remarks from a number of noted dignitaries 
from Little Pine and surrounding area were all part of the 
opening celebration. The event was emceed by Gavin Baptiste, 
and Little Pine Chief Wayne Semaganis and Councillor Serinda 
Baptiste both spoke about the project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the previous building had burned down in 2009. 



March 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3593 

The opening of the new office symbolizes the fruition of years 
of hard work from all people across the First Nation. In a simple 
but significant acknowledgement of the past, photos of previous 
Little Pine elders were held up during the ribbon-cutting 
ceremony, recognizing those who had laid the groundwork for 
the new facility today. 
 
This ceremony was also used to introduce a new initiative run 
by the First Nation: the Little Pine security team. The security 
team was established in conjunction with the RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] and is in the first phase of a process 
to introduce a self-administered policing force for Little Pine 
First Nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of everyone in the Assembly, I’d like to 
congratulate Chief Wayne Semaganis and everyone who was 
involved in the construction of the new band office and his 
forward thinking for policing. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Swift Current. 
 

A Busy Weekend in Swift Current 
 
Mr. Hindley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was a busy 
weekend in Swift Current. Mr. Speaker, on Friday morning I 
was invited to bring greetings at the opening of a new 
restaurant. Flavorii is a combination East Indian/Mexican food 
restaurant opened by Mr. Chirag Shah and his family. Chirag 
immigrated to Canada in 2001 and recently moved to Swift 
Current, where he’s been investing in a number of business 
ventures. And I congratulate him on the opening of that new 
restaurant. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, on Friday afternoon I had the chance to 
speak at the under-18 provincial curling championships kickoff 
luncheon. We had 22 teams from eight different regions around 
the province competing for a chance to represent Saskatchewan 
at the nationals taking place in April. Thank you to the teams 
and the organizers led by chairperson Karen Biese of the Swift 
Current Curling Club. 
 
Friday evening, Mr. Speaker, I had the chance to attend the 
Swift Current Chamber of Commerce fourth annual farmer 
appreciation banquet where I had brought greetings on behalf of 
the Minister of Agriculture. It was an opportunity to recognize 
the major impact that agriculture has on the local and provincial 
economy. The guest speaker was Murad Al-Katib of AGT 
Foods, who is truly a champion of our industry. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, on Saturday night I had a chance to attend 
the Swift Current branch of the Saskatchewan Wildlife 
Federation annual fundraising banquet. It was their 27th annual 
banquet. Local President Clark Schultz and his team of 
volunteers and organizers have done a great job of advocating 
for conservation and enhancement of wildlife habitat. 
 
I’d ask all members to join me in congratulating and thanking 
all of these Swift Current businesses and organizations for the 
great work they do. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Global Transportation Hub and  
Government Transparency 

 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With less than half of 
the land sold and sales having ground to a halt, the GTH 
[Global Transportation Hub] has added $37 million to our 
ballooning public debt. This project can’t move forward under 
its current cloud of scandal and suspicion, Mr. Speaker. In the 
interest of good public fiscal management, will the Premier 
commit to the public inquiry that his Deputy Premier asked for 
in September? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I am pleased to take the question on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we are certainly 
working hard; the GTH board and management is working hard 
to ensure that the Global Transportation Hub is a success 
moving forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Certainly the board and management are well aware of slower 
industrial development, not just that is impacting the Global 
Transportation Hub but really all across Western Canada. As a 
result, anticipated land sales have been lower, Mr. Speaker. I 
would say that the members opposite’s public negativity on the 
matter hasn’t certainly helped the matter as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, certainly I think the members opposite will 
recognize that within a very short number of years, nearly 1,000 
full-time jobs have been created. Over 1,800 construction jobs 
have been created. There is work going on as we speak out at 
the Global Transportation Hub, Mr. Speaker, and the province 
is benefiting from additional tax revenue as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we’d invite the members opposite to perhaps change their 
tune a little bit and become a little bit more positive on the 
potential of the Global Transportation Hub. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, it would be easier for us to change 
our tune if this government would face the music. The question 
was whether or not he would have a public inquiry, Mr. 
Speaker. Given the huge hole the GTH is leaving in our 
province’s budget, if the Premier won’t call a public inquiry, 
will he at least commit to revamping the conflict of interest Act, 
just as was proposed by the member from Meadow Lake and 
the Deputy Premier? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, certainly the members 
opposite will know that the government, this government on 
this side of the House, took a much different approach when 
concerns were raised than the members opposite did when they 
were the Government of Saskatchewan when concerns were 
raised about particular business deals, such as getting into the 
potato industry, which the members opposite wanted to get the 
government involved in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only amount of accountability that we 
underwent in this province in that respect was to have the 



3594 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2018 

hand-picked deputy minister to the premier — then Lorne 
Calvert was the premier from the members opposite — who did 
an investigation, Mr. Speaker. And you know, we all know the 
story: Eldon Lautermilch got moved over, but there was no 
problems, nothing to see here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, we took concerns very 
seriously. That’s why this side of the House, the government, 
asked the Provincial Auditor to look into the matter to raise, 
bring forward recommendations. The government has accepted 
all of those recommendations, brought them forward, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is further work being done on this matter, 
and we’ll wait to see how that concludes, Mr. Speaker. But in 
the meantime, Mr. Speaker, this is an entity that has grown 
private investment, private sector investment, to the tune of 
nearly half a billion dollars in just the first couple of years of its 
creation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, as is obvious in the public 
discourse and the fact that these units aren’t selling, there 
remain significant questions. Having a public inquiry, having 
changes to the conflict of interest Act, will allow us to both find 
out what mistakes were made and prevent future mistakes. 
 
Speaking about mistakes, we heard Brad Wall on his way out of 
the premier’s office say that there were mistakes made in last 
year’s budget. And the government ended up spending quite a 
bit of time last year having to walk back some of the 
ill-considered and unpopular choices that were made: cuts to 
libraries, cuts to funerals for people who died while on social 
services, cuts to various services that should never have been 
touched in the first place. 
 
So my question, Mr. Speaker, is: this year, has the Premier done 
his homework? Will he be able to show us that he’s made the 
right choices, that he’s done the work, that he can actually stick 
with his choices throughout the year? Or are we going to see 
more and more choices walked back in another ill-considered 
and hasty budget? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And as was announced shortly after I became Premier, Mr. 
Speaker, is we would have a budget coming forthwith on April 
the 10th, Mr. Speaker — a small delay but I think a fair delay in 
light of a new leader on both sides of the House, Mr. Speaker, a 
new cabinet. And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll bring that budget forward 
on behalf of the people of the province as soon as possible. 
 
We’ve been busy, Mr. Speaker, all cabinet ministers, consulting 
with our stakeholders and those that are impacted by any budget 
here in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and looking 
for opportunities to ensure that we are investing in precisely 
those core services, Mr. Speaker, those services that the people 

across this province expect their provincial government to 
invest in, Mr. Speaker. We heard, and I’m sure members in the 
leadership campaign across . . . We were across this province 
and heard from people in the province on what those core 
services are, Mr. Speaker, and what they expect in health care 
and in education and in taxation, Mr. Speaker — what is 
acceptable and what may not be. 
 
We’ve made changes, Mr. Speaker. We’ve made changes with 
respect to the PST [provincial sales tax] on agricultural 
insurance as well as life and health insurance. And we’ve made 
changes, Mr. Speaker, investing in our next generation, 
investing in our classrooms, directly in our classrooms. And 
we’ve moved those changes up, gave the quarterly amount for 
the last quarter this year, Mr. Speaker. We will always, always, 
Mr. Speaker, ensure that we invest on behalf of the people of 
the province, invest wisely, and always stand with our jobs, our 
communities, and every individual across the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen seven 
deficit budgets from this government during their tenure. We’re 
likely to see another. Despite years of record revenue, this 
government has left us 11 years older and deeper in debt. And, 
Mr. Speaker, that debt is projected to reach $22 billion by 2020, 
the highest in the history of this province. Despite those 
spending habits, the Saskatchewan people face higher fees and 
cuts to core services, Mr. Speaker. We’re paying more and 
we’re getting less. 
 
In the budget ahead, Mr. Speaker, what assurances can the 
Premier offer that in this budget, the people of Saskatchewan 
won’t be asked to pay yet again for the Sask Party’s decade of 
fiscal mismanagement with higher fees and cuts to services? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to give 
the assurance of the record of this government, Mr. Speaker, 
over the last decade — the record of our investment, Mr. 
Speaker, in communities; a record of our investment in health 
care, Mr. Speaker; in health care, education, and social services. 
 
Our investment in those portfolios, Mr. Speaker, which is the 
lion’s share of the budget each and every year, is up 72 per cent 
in just 10 years, Mr. Speaker. That’s money that is invested in 
our communities across the province of Saskatchewan, invested 
in those that needed it, and invested in those core services that 
the people of this province expect their provincial government 
to provide, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What this government will not do, Mr. Speaker, is put forward a 
two-and-a-half-billion-dollar spending spree, Mr. Speaker, with 
absolutely no plan, no plan whatsoever, to fill that gap, Mr. 
Speaker. Not even a $4 billion carbon tax over five years, Mr. 
Speaker, which those members support, on industries and jobs 
and communities right across this province would pay for that 
deficit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 



March 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3595 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — The minister talks a good game when it comes to 
supporting children in the classroom, Mr. Speaker, but actions 
speak louder than words. Reversing $7.5 million of the funding 
cuts in last year’s budget is still a cut. In fact, it’s a $46.5 
million cut from the 2016 levels, and that doesn’t even account 
for contractual obligations, inflation, thousands of new students, 
or the PST and power rate hikes that this government has 
foisted upon divisions. 
 
The minister says that the $30 million promised on the 
campaign trail is a start. Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t even get us to 
the starting line from last year. Will the Minister of Education 
show that he stands not only by the Premier’s commitment but 
also his own, and commit to reinstating at least the full $54 
million that they cut last year? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, it wasn’t six weeks ago — and I’ve mentioned this in 
the House on a number of occasions — when I stood with the 
Premier, and the Premier stood in the rotunda of this building, 
Mr. Speaker, and committed to seven and a half million dollars 
in mid-year funding, Mr. Speaker, which annualizes to $30 
million, Mr. Speaker. We know there’s more work to do, Mr. 
Speaker, but we’re committed to supporting children in the 
classroom, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the overall education budget since we took power 
in 2007 is up 114 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Operating funding to 
school divisions is up over 32 per cent, Mr. Speaker. This 
government, Mr. Speaker, in the commitments that have 
recently been made by this government, is showing 
commitment to the classroom, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We acknowledge there’s more work to do, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’re going to continue to do that work. We’re going to do that 
in consultation with teachers and with school divisions, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re going to do it in consultation with parents to 
make sure that we’re properly supporting children in the 
classroom, Mr. Speaker. As I say, there’s more work to do, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re committed to doing that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the minister acts like the $7.5 
million is extra money, but it’s not. It’s a fraction of what was 
taken from our classrooms last year, leading to hundreds of job 
losses and cuts to very much needed programs. 
 
A real commitment to education would start with a full reversal 
of the $55 million cut, followed by getting to the table with 
school divisions, boards, educators, and others to figure out 
stable, predictable funding that accounts for growth, inflation, 
and other pressures that have flowed from this Sask Party’s 
decisions. 
 
Again, will the minister reverse the cuts in full and get to the 
table and make sure that there are no further cuts to our 
children’s classrooms? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition can wait for 
the budget which is going to be delivered in just two short 
weeks, Mr. Speaker. But I’ll tell you this, Mr. Speaker: we’re 
committed to having these ongoing conversations, Mr. Speaker. 
I met with a number of school divisions since I became the 
Minister of Education, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to continue to 
meet with school divisions. I’m going to continue to meet with 
teachers, continue to meet with their organizations that 
represent them, Mr. Speaker, so we can understand properly 
what the needs in the classrooms are, what they need to ensure 
that we provide proper education to the children in the 
classroom, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re committed to these dialogues. We’re committed to this 
conversation, Mr. Speaker. And I did that through the 
campaign, Mr. Speaker, talking about how important it was to 
have those meaningful conversations, those respectful 
conversations — and we’re having those, Mr. Speaker. But the 
opposition can wait for the budget, Mr. Speaker. It will be 
delivered in two short weeks, Mr. Speaker, and they can see our 
commitment to education then. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Fee Increases 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, cutting funding for education 
just doesn’t make sense. And it makes even less sense when 
you think about how much more money the Sask Party is now 
taking out of the pockets of Saskatchewan families. 
 
This year’s fee increases add up to more than $18 million. Now 
listen, that is more than $5 million more than the last four years 
of rate increases combined. They’re making everything more 
expensive, from cottages out at the lake, traffic tickets, to kids’ 
juice boxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now last weekend we heard about turkey sales. What’s up this 
weekend, a bottle drive to keep us afloat? How can the Sask 
Party justify reaching further into the pockets of Saskatchewan 
people when they’re wasting money hand over fist at the GTH, 
cutting health care, education, and supports for the vulnerable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s a 
number of reasons. Of course it’s diverse what the fee increases 
are. There’s a number of reasons behind the fee increases. Some 
are cost recovery because the cost of the program has increased. 
Some are deterrents for behaviour, such as speeding tickets. So 
I suppose the member opposite thinks that all families are 
speeding and therefore it’s going to affect all families. I don’t 
believe that’s true, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When she talks about the 2 cents on recycling charges, Mr. 
Speaker, she knows that that money goes into environmental 
initiatives. You would think she would be supportive of that. 
Considering that she will support a carbon tax for environment 
purposes, why wouldn’t she support a 2 cents recyclable fee, 
Mr. Speaker? That’s kind of . . . What she says on one hand 



3596 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2018 

isn’t what she thinks on the other. So she’s got to get her 
message straight. Does she support it or not? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, these backdoor tax hikes are 
totally unacceptable. Now last week I had the chance to go door 
knocking with our team in the last Finance minister’s 
constituency. And I’m sure the people of Regina Northeast will 
be very interested in hearing about this latest round of backdoor 
tax hikes: 10.2 million more for apple juice boxes; six point . . . 
million more for traffic tickets; more than a quarter million in 
courthouse fees, as if lawsuits aren’t expensive enough already; 
and more than half a million dollars from farmers working the 
land. 
 
So my question for the Finance minister is, in addition to the 
$18 million backdoor tax increase, are there any other increases 
in the upcoming budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, this was so backdoor we 
put out a press release and we gave, you know, quite a detailed 
description of what these fees are. That’s how backdoor we 
were, Mr. Speaker. These are fees that already exist, they’re so 
backdoor, and there was just some increases to different fees. 
And as I said, it was for different purposes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what we won’t be doing is a carbon tax, which is going to 
affect absolutely every individual in this province. It’s going to 
hurt every family and it’s going to hurt every business and it’s 
going to stagnate growth within our province. That’s what 
we’re not going to do. So can she explain how a carbon tax is a 
better idea? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Film Industry and Government-Owned Buildings 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the swarm of fees referenced by 
my colleague from Nutana is not the only damaging fiscal move 
made by the Saskatchewan Party government. Back in 2012, the 
Sask Party scrapped the film employment tax credit and put our 
province’s once-thriving film industry on life-support. They 
bowled ahead with this wrong-headed cut despite the protests of 
the film industry, Saskatchewan people, and even the 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, who in their analysis 
said that for over $1 million a year, this tax credit created $44 
million in economic activity right across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the film industry makes us proud. It made the 
people of Saskatchewan millions and it created hundreds of 
jobs. In the upcoming provincial budget, will the Sask Party do 
the right thing and restore the film employment tax credit? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
We appreciate the good work the film industry does and 

continues to do in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We have 
Creative Saskatchewan that has been around since 2012. It 
helps all the creative sectors, Mr. Speaker. And this is a 
program that over $2 million a year is spent in the film 
production business, Mr. Speaker, and you know, it’s working 
well. I have a list here, if I have subsequent questions, of all the 
films that take place in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And with the changing media sector, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen 
some changes from Creative Saskatchewan in order to hit the 
digital interactive area, Mr. Speaker, the micro-budget film 
feature, and the web series as well. So film entrepreneurs do a 
great work in our province. There’s been the Filmpool around 
for many decades. You know, they’re doing great work, Mr. 
Speaker, and that will continue with the support from Creative 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and again that work will continue 
with grants from Creative Saskatchewan. And again I’m very 
proud of the film industry here in our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Sound Stage is 
a state-of-the-art facility where our once-thriving film industry 
is making its last stand. Last week, after putting out a call for 
anyone interested in buying up a government building, the 
Minister of Central Services puts what is left of the industry on 
edge. This facility is critical infrastructure for the film industry, 
and the Sask Party knows that if they privatize the sound stage 
it will be nearly impossible for the film industry to recover. 
 
They’ve already done enough damage to the film industry, Mr. 
Speaker, and you can see that looking right across this nation. 
Will the Minister of Central Services or perhaps the Minister 
Responsible for Creative Saskatchewan stand in the Assembly 
today and reassure the people of Saskatchewan that the 
Saskatchewan-Canada Sound Stage will not be sold off? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. What we are committed to is to ensure that each one of 
the 660 buildings that are owned by the Government of 
Saskatchewan are used to their highest potential, to make sure 
that the occupancy rates are as high as possible, Mr. Speaker, 
and to ensure that everyone has an opportunity to occupy those 
buildings. So again, we’re committed to ensuring that each and 
every taxpayer’s dollar is used in a most prudent way, and that 
includes those 660 buildings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite want to talk about a number 
of buildings. I’ll talk to them about a number of buildings. How 
about the 176 schools that they closed under their watch, Mr. 
Speaker? How about the 52 hospitals that they closed under 
their watch, Mr. Speaker? And how about the 1,200 long-term 
care beds that they ensured were closed under their watch? Mr. 
Speaker, we will take no lessons from the members opposite 
about how to operate government buildings. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
[14:15] 



March 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3597 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about how he’s 
put 660 Saskatchewan-government-owned buildings on some 
kind of a review. Well I can tell you what, Mr. Speaker: there’s 
already been a review conducted as regards to the future of the 
sound stage, and that review came back with the 
recommendation to the government that they should get the film 
industry going again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So if that minister is interested in proper use of public assets, 
maybe he could look at the review that was conducted in the 
Ministry of Culture when that minister was responsible for the 
portfolio, Mr. Speaker, and follow the advice of his own 
ministry in terms of what it’s going to take to get our industry in 
the film sector back on its feet again, competing, and doing well 
like it is in other jurisdictions across this country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again they’re looking to that minister for a reassurance that 
the sound stage is not going to be sold off for pennies on the 
dollar, Mr. Speaker. Can he give the people of Saskatchewan 
that assurance here today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Yes, thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. We continue to support the film industry, Mr. Speaker. 
There was tough decisions that had to be made in 2012. We 
have to make sure we can have our expenses taken care of, Mr. 
Speaker, and we don’t have an unlimited amount of money. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you know, I point to the members opposite. 
They want to spend two and a half billion dollars that’s not 
been costed. So, Mr. Speaker, I think that they have several 
million dollars, part of that in the leader’s platform, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So like I said, we, our entrepreneurs, do good work. I was at the 
independent film awards earlier this year, Mr. Speaker, and we 
saw great Saskatchewan stories being told through our grant 
program, Mr. Speaker. I mentioned if I got up again I’d show 
you several of these programs that are going towards film 
within our province. And there’s many more outside of Creative 
Saskatchewan: SuperGrid; A.R.C.H.I.E. 2; The Other Side; 
First Response, the series — there’s 11 of those; The Other 
Side; Sonny’s World; Canadian Newcomers; Brotherhood; 
Searching for Caribou; Bot Shop, Mr. Speaker. There’s several 
in the media development grant, the web series grant. There’s 
many more here, Mr. Speaker. Creative Saskatchewan 
continues to do great work here in our province, and our 
filmmakers do as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Reporting on Pipeline Safety 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Such 
confusion over there. But we’ll try another question here. 
 
Saskatchewan people need to be able to trust that the 
government is going to ensure that pipelines are safe and 
properly regulated. That trust is key to protecting our 
environment and key to creating public support needed to get 
new projects approved. But once again, the Saskatchewan 

Party’s failure with the Husky oil spill has broken that trust. 
They are claiming that they can’t release the inspection records, 
even though the independent Information and Privacy 
Commissioner said, and I quote:  
 

Good investigators will not be swayed by publicity, but 
will base their conclusion on facts. Further, I am not 
persuaded that this would lead to an unfair trial. 

 
Nothing in those reports could compromise the investigation or 
any charges, so why won’t the Minister of Energy and 
Resources table those reports today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Mr. Speaker, it’s significant that this is the 
first time that an investigation under the pipeline amendment 
Act has been referred to public prosecutions, and that includes 
for spills under their watch, Mr. Speaker. As the member 
opposite knows, a thorough investigation was undertaken by the 
then Ministry of the Economy following the accident in 2016, 
and the findings were referred to the Ministry of Justice. 
Immediate action was taken. The cleanup was completed last 
summer. 1.1 million has been reimbursed to the government, 
and Husky has worked with officials, compensated 
municipalities and the First Nations that were affected. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have learned from this accident. We’ve 
made significant amendments to The Pipelines Act that will 
strengthen pipeline regulations, will strengthen regulatory 
oversight, and will address all outstanding recommendations 
from the auditor’s 2012 report on pipeline regulations, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s our commitment. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s sure 
nice to see that the Saskatchewan Party has let the Energy and 
Resources minister out of their ministerial protection program 
and finally answer a question. But she should be able to give a 
real answer for this government’s failure to come clean on the 
Husky oil spill. Their failure to release the records and their 
failure to show accountability undermines their credibility. It 
erodes public trust in our network of pipeline infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is bad for our environment. It’s also bad for 
our economy as well. So will the Minister of Energy and 
Resources answer this time very clearly: when will the public 
get to see the Husky inspection reports? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Interesting on the 
public trust issue, Mr. Speaker, because we put reports online 
every week and we notify the public if there are any risks to 
public safety. And we’re reviewing our notification system to 
determine if any further enhancements need to be made. We 
don’t stick notification reports in storage as they did, so anyone 
actually wanting to read them had to manually sort through 
boxes, Mr. Speaker. We couldn’t find any media advisories or 
releases about the spills or leaks under their watch, Mr. 



3598 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2018 

Speaker, when the member for Athabasca was the minister of 
the Environment or the member for Saskatoon Centre was the 
minister of the Environment. We’ve got the cubes spilled right 
here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In contrast, major changes to the pipeline amendment Act under 
our watch include licensing of flowlines to enhance regulatory 
oversight of pipelines, auditing the integrity management 
programs of pipeline auditors, expanding the legal framework 
for an online pipeline licensing system, more inspection, more 
investigation, more compliance audit powers for ministry staff, 
and on and on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Meili: — Asking leave to return to introduction of guests, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has asked leave 
to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Some of the members 
in the House might have noticed in the east gallery a young man 
who’s now hiding and has been looking disapprovingly upon 
our proceedings during question period. I don’t know if that’s 
because of our behaviour or because of the quality of the puns 
in the questions, Mr. Speaker. But this young man is Abraham 
Meili. He’s my son. He’s six years old, and he has over the last 
few months accompanied me across the province — as far north 
as La Loche, down to Swift Current, all over the place. And we 
had a great time. 
 
I’ve been a little worried that maybe he paid a bit too much 
attention to politics. However he was asked the other day 
whether . . . Someone said to him, well your dad wants to be 
premier; are you going to be prime minister some day? And he 
said, you know, I can’t really see myself ever going federal. 
 
So I’m glad he takes such an interest in this process and in our 
province, and ask the members to join me in welcoming him 
and his grandparents to their legislature. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Membership of the Board of Internal Economy 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to 
inform the Assembly that I received a message from His 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor outlining the membership of 
the Board of Internal Economy effective March 15th, 2018. 
Those members are Hon. Mark Docherty, Hon. Jeremy 
Harrison, Hon. Paul Merriman, Hon. Greg Brkich, Dan 
D’Autremont, David Forbes, and Nicole Sarauer. 
 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 
 
The Speaker: — I would also like to table a letter from the 

Chief Electoral Officer that Ken Francis, Todd Goudy, and 
Everett Hindley were duly elected in the constituencies of 
Kindersley, Melfort, and Swift Current. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 178 through 181. 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 178 to 181 is ordered. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 121 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 121 — The Cannabis 
Control (Saskatchewan) Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure this 
afternoon to rise and enter into debate on Bill No. 121, the 
cannabis controls Act. Mr. Speaker, of course this is a piece of 
legislation that has seen a great deal of scrutiny, of interest not 
only in this province but right across the country. 
 
Of course the need for this bill came out of the federal 
government’s intention to legalize cannabis in this province 
with Bill C-45, Mr. Speaker, something that was made no secret 
of in their federal platform in 2015, and so reasonable, I think, 
that provinces would have been ready for this legislation and 
expect that it was coming. And, Mr. Speaker, it was so well 
concealed that they put it in their platform and put it at the head 
of communications. So, Mr. Speaker, my point is this. We were 
the last jurisdiction, the last province to introduce legislation 
with regard to the legalization of cannabis, and there are some 
concerns there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are in a position now where legalization will happen this 
summer, as early as July, and here we sit with not a great deal 
of time to scrutinize this bill and make sure that we get it right 
here. Of course this is not a unique position, but a position 
where this is an area that is not only a federal jurisdiction but 
there are a number of points that will be left up to the provinces 
to deal with. I’m just looking for my notes here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So some of the areas that are a federal responsibility: possession 
limits, we see both a federal and provincial responsibility there. 
Advertising and packaging and trafficking fall under federal 
responsibility. Both the federal government and provincial 
government have responsibility around impaired driving. It’s a 
federal issue, the use of medical cannabis is a . . . the 
jurisdiction lies with the federal government there. 
 



March 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3599 

Some of the other areas that this Assembly is being asked to 
contemplate, areas of provincial jurisdiction include age limit, 
Mr. Speaker. And I know that there has been a lot of debate 
about what is the right age for cannabis, the legal age. What’s 
been proposed with this legislation is levelling with the age for 
alcohol consumption, which is 19 in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
And that is something that we don’t have an issue with on this 
side of the Assembly. 
 
Of course public education falls both to the federal and 
provincial governments, as does public health, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s something that we’ve seen scant detail on at this 
point with regard to how those pieces will roll out. 
 
Another piece that we’ve seen scant detail on is with regard to 
taxation, Mr. Speaker. And of course it’s not only the province, 
this Assembly, that has a keen interest in how this legislation 
will roll out. Also the municipalities, Mr. Speaker, they have 
been asking for a long time for details, to be consulted on this 
bill and the legislation that we knew would be coming. But I’m 
not sure that that has been met satisfactorily, nor have those 
answers been particularly forthcoming. So there’s still, despite 
being a few short months away from legalized cannabis in this 
country, there are a lot of questions that remain on the table, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Some of the other points that fall under provincial jurisdiction 
include home cultivation — both a federal and provincial issue, 
Mr. Speaker. Some that fall entirely to the provinces include 
distribution and wholesaling, which I will return to many if not 
all of these points as I proceed here, Mr. Speaker. The retail 
model is left with the provinces, as is the retail location and 
rules. And regulatory compliance falls under both federal and 
provincial jurisdiction. 
 
Public consumption is also left to the provinces to come up with 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. And land use and zoning, that’s 
something that falls to the municipalities and has been 
something that’s been very difficult for them to get ahead of, 
with the lack of timeliness with regard to how this government 
intended to deal with the implications of Bill C-45, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
One of the things that was done, and of note, Mr. Speaker, was 
an online framework and . . . the survey results, rather, Mr. 
Speaker. There was a fairly extensive survey. I think that there 
were some concerns raised about the methodology with this 
particular survey — just ensuring that those respondents were 
from the province of Saskatchewan — and I’ll leave that to 
others to discern if that was the case or not. But regardless, 
there were almost 35,000 respondents and, of that number, well 
just over 26,000 completed the full survey. And I understand 
that that’s the highest response rate of any Saskatchewan 
survey, Mr. Speaker, so there is that. I think that speaks to the 
level of engagement and the number of questions that people of 
Saskatchewan have about this legislation. 
 
And certainly there is a great deal of concern out there, 
questions about exactly how this will roll out in the province, 
Mr. Speaker. Issues around public smoking of cannabis, we’ve 
heard that a lot, Mr. Speaker, and that is something in this 

proposed legislation that would be prohibited. 
 
I heard a lot of concerns as Education critic about the use of pot 
around schools, the regulation . . . If the age for pot was too 
low, that you would have students who were still in school who 
would be legally able to smoke pot and attend school. I think 
that we avoid some of that by proposing the age limit of 19, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And also one of the lingering concerns that we hear about is 
enforceability. Of course we have measures, roadside blood 
alcohol tests, that do with some precision, I understand, Mr. 
Speaker, are able to detect blood alcohol levels, and then 
follow-up tests to those roadside tests. But I’m not sure that 
there is a device or a method to as accurately measure 
impairment by cannabis. So that leads to a bit of an 
enforceability issue, and it’s something that I’m sure that our 
critic will have more questions in committee about with regard 
to what is the latest evidence, what are the latest methods with 
regard to law enforcement around impairment. 
 
And I understand that there has been indication of zero 
tolerance for cannabis while driving, Mr. Speaker. There are 
some differences — I remember from my time as a social 
worker in the hospital — some difference about how cannabis 
and alcohol are metabolized in the body. And alcohol is not fat 
soluble and leaves the body in a fairly quick manner, Mr. 
Speaker, but cannabis is fat soluble, so it does show up in the 
body for a longer period of time. 
 
So I don’t have the answer to that one, Mr. Speaker, but I do 
think it’s a question worth asking. If we put something in 
legislation as zero tolerance, I think it is reasonable that we 
have measures around enforceability of those measures. And I 
think that those are some questions that remain with regard to 
this legislation. 
 
I’ll just go through some of what we do know, Mr. Speaker. As 
I have said, there are still some question marks here. What we 
do know about this bill is that it creates the regulatory 
framework for legalized cannabis. And key elements of that 
include, the fact is, as I’ve mentioned, consuming cannabis in 
public spaces is prohibited. Of course not unlike alcohol, Mr. 
Speaker, I suppose more like smoking cigarettes, which we do 
have bans on at the municipal level, it . . . Well I’ll just put it 
plainly. It doesn’t smell very good, Mr. Speaker, so I 
understand the concerns around that. 
 
I’m not sure about the prohibitions around rental spaces or 
shared spaces and what that looks like. I know I have heard 
those concerns; if you choose not to smoke but your neighbour 
does, what implications that has for your living space. 
Possession of more than 30 grams and more than four plants is 
prohibited, so it does allow for personal growth of four plants. 
And 30 grams, I’m not sure what . . . I have to admit to not 
being too up on how much that allows for, Mr. Speaker, but I 
assume that homework has been done there and this is in line 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Someone tells me that is a lot. 
My mother is watching. I do not know how much that is, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
People under 19, as I’ve stated, are prohibited from possessing 
or consuming cannabis. This is punishable by a fine of up to 



3600 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2018 

$2,000, Mr. Speaker. And I think this is one that there is some 
question about, just again in terms of enforceability. 
 
Possession of cannabis in a vehicle is prohibited except when 
transporting it from the place it was obtained to the place where 
it will be consumed, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure how we know 
how long the cannabis has been in the car, or where it was 
purchased, or what the destination point is, so I think that 
perhaps those who are made to enforce this legislation might 
have some questions about that, and I hope that the minister is 
able to respond to those. 
 
Also here we have rules for retail stores selling cannabis 
established, and I’ll get back to that in a second, Mr. Speaker, 
just with regard to the RFPs [request for proposal] that have 
been put out for those retail establishments. 
 
But just to enter into with some of the concerns again, Mr. 
Speaker. And the overarching concern here is this: is that here 
we are in a position in March of 2018, three years after that we 
ought have reasonably known that this legislation was coming 
in, playing hurry-up offence, or defence I suppose, Mr. Speaker, 
here trying to get this legislation passed before the end of 
session. And I’m not sure that we always get the best oversight 
and the best legislation when we’re playing catch-up. So that is 
an overarching concern and certainly a theme that we’ve seen 
through a number of pieces of legislation and areas, 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker. And this province has had a 
tendency or a history in the past of being leaders, being on the 
forefront of issues, and being visionary. And here we see again, 
unfortunately, us trying to play catch-up with the rest of 
Canada. And I think that that is unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s well below our capabilities in this province. 
 
I would also say, I indicate our support as I have with the 
minimum age being 19. I think with given what we already 
have in place for alcohol consumption and rules around alcohol, 
that maybe that that does make sense. I know there is some 
evidence that, you know, brains are still growing well into the 
20s, Mr. Speaker. But that, coupled with public education about 
the impact of cannabis on brains, and particularly for young 
people, I think is important. And I hope that details will be 
forthcoming soon and some resources made available to ensure 
that we do have good education about the impact of cannabis, 
whether it’s legal or not. I mean, I guess the parallel with 
alcohol, we do know that alcohol is legal for those 19 and over 
in this province but is not without impact with regard to 
impairment of course, Mr. Speaker, around driving, but also 
without impact on health and on brain development, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I think that we’ll be looking very carefully with regard to 
how those resources will roll out and who will be undertaking 
that work to ensure that we are getting the best information, that 
we’re getting factual information out into the hands of those 
who are making a decision about cannabis use. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is, I mentioned earlier, the RFP process and 
that has been also an area of interest. People . . . Municipalities 
of course do have the option of opting out and there have been a 
number of communities — Biggar, Kindersley, Pilot Butte, 
Shellbrook, and White City — who were initially eligible but 
opted out during the allocation of retail permits. I believe there 

were 60 that were offered, and in addition Estevan was eligible 
for two permits but chose to offer one permit. 
 
So that RFP process is still ongoing right now I understand, up 
until April the 10th. I don’t have a lot of details about that RFP 
process, but I do note that a character reference is one part of 
the RFP process as well as a financial stress test, Mr. Speaker. 
So I’m not sure what the details are around that financial stress 
test. I hope that there is a bit of a level playing field in terms of 
smaller retailers and larger retailers, and that it’s not so onerous, 
Mr. Speaker, that it pushes a lot of people out of the running for 
eligibility. 
 
Of course the initial screening for financial capacity and 
inventory and sales reporting is only the first phase of this RFP 
process. The second is a random draw or a lottery for 
proponents who qualify during phase one. So that will be, I 
suppose, a big day for those potential retailers in the province. 
And I’m not sure what the timeline is on that but it is certainly 
. . . I’m not certain if it’s novel, but a new-to-me way of going 
through the RFP process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some of the things that we know about operating details, that 
these stores must be stand-alone, selling only cannabis and 
accessories. We do know that edibles are not part of this 
legislation. I think we have an indication from the federal 
government that edibles will be addressed a year from the 
implementation of C-45. Those who have a retail operation will 
also be able to sell online, Mr. Speaker. So I would hope that 
there are some parameters around that. I can understand when 
someone is coming into the store how you can . . . there are 
some measures in place to ensure the age of the person 
purchasing the cannabis. I’m not sure what the measures will be 
around the online sales, so I think that that’s something that we 
will be looking for more detail in in committee on this bill. 
 
The retailers must purchase the product from a wholesaler 
licensed by SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority]. This is something, Mr. Speaker, that goes against 
. . . For the most part, a lot of what came forth in this legislation 
was in keeping with recommendations of those who were 
surveyed, Mr. Speaker, but around the wholesaling piece, that is 
something that went against the wish of or the recommendation 
of the majority of those who took the survey. 
 
[14:45] 
 
In fact 45 per cent of those who took the survey thought that it 
should be run through a provincial wholesale similar to SLGA 
government wholesale, and that recommendation was not 
heeded, Mr. Speaker. And given the history with regard to 
SLGA, I guess I am not surprised that that was not heeded by 
this government, Mr. Speaker. But I do think that is not in line 
with what is happening in other provinces and I would be very 
curious, and I’m sure that the critic is, with regard to why they 
disregarded that best practice with regard to the wholesaling of 
cannabis in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again this remains a piece of legislation that many column 
inches have been written on in this province and across the 
country. A lot of details that still need to be forthcoming and a 
lot of questions that need to be answered. Some of that I hope, 
Mr. Speaker, well I hope all of it will be forthcoming when the 



March 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3601 

critic sits down with the minister and his officials in committee. 
But I think that I have exhausted my questions and comments 
on the issue to this point, and with that will move to adjourn 
debate on Bill 121. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 121, The Cannabis 
Control (Saskatchewan) Act.  
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 122 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 122 — The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2018/Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi 
intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I mentioned, I think 
last week, often we get to stand up and speak to legislation that 
is noteworthy, that is timely, that has a great deal of public 
interest. And then the other side of that, Mr. Speaker, is the very 
important but a little less exciting duty to stand up and to talk 
about consequential amendments. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, when we are looking at a new piece of 
legislation, which this is — this is not replacing any existing 
bill — there’s need not only for scrutiny there, but there’s also 
need for the necessary consequential amendments, Mr. Speaker. 
And so of course this piece of legislation is very important to 
align with the changes being made. It’s important that we align 
any changes being made in Bill 121, that they are paralleled in 
Bill 122. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with so much yet to be answered with regard to 
Bill 121, of course we will need to make sure that we’re making 
any necessary changes in all of the regulatory framework to be 
put forth in Bill 122. But again this perhaps is not the best place 
— well certainly for this member — to get into the nitty gritty 
of the consequential amendments. I will leave it to the capable 
hands of the critic to ensure that these consequential 
amendments are in good alignment with what is set out in Bill 
121. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I will move to adjourn debate 
on Bill 122. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 122, The Cannabis 
Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2018.  
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 115 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 115 — The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise today to enter into adjourned debates. This time we’re 
talking about Bill 115, The Residential Tenancies Amendment 
Act of 2017. 
 
We’re sort of continuing on with our theme in talking about 
cannabis, as my colleague from Regina Lakeview has been 
doing already. And of course with the changes that are coming 
forward in Bills 121 and 122, there are other Acts that require 
amendment as well, and one of those is the bill that is before us 
today, Bill No. 115. 
 
So there’s a couple of things that I want to talk about here in 
relation to these proposed changes, Mr. Speaker. And one of 
them is the intent behind this piece of legislation. As you know, 
we’re talking about an Act that’s about 60 pages long, that has 
been set up to help us strike a balance between the different 
parties that are involved in residential tenancies. So the idea 
here is that there will be a balance between renters and 
landlords, and that the legislation is supposed to protect that 
balance and to ensure that both parties involved know what 
their obligations are in the agreement. 
 
It also provides rules for tenancy agreements — so what can 
and cannot be included in tenancy agreements — and some 
guidelines. So if anyone’s watching at home and they’re 
thinking about renting out their space, it’s best to consult this 
piece of legislation so that you know what rules you can and 
cannot create. It also identifies some rules surrounding ending a 
tenancy, and several other legal matters that are associated with 
renting. So we refer back to this piece of legislation quite 
frequently, and of course the Office of Residential Tenancies is 
constantly interpreting it and holding hearings and providing 
rulings on this Act as well. So a lot of important pieces here that 
impact the people of Saskatchewan quite greatly. 
 
So I did take some time to speak to some members of my 
constituency and some members of our community, and I’ll be 
talking about some of the feedback that they provided to me as 
well. A lot of people were pretty enthusiastic to speak about the 
changes in this bill, Mr. Speaker, so I would like to be able to 
do them justice and make sure that their voices are heard in this 
as well. 
 
So this bill that we have in front of us aims to do four main 
things. So it gives landlords powers to make rules, and these are 
new powers that are “. . . prohibiting the possession, use, selling 
or distribution of cannabis or the growing and possession of 
cannabis plants . . .” It gives the ORT hearing officers new 
powers to refuse to allow an application from a tenant who’s in 
contravention of an ORT order. It forces tenants to continue to 
pay their rent for the duration of the appeal process when 
appealing the ORT’s decision to grant the landlord possession 



3602 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2018 

of a rental unit for rent arrears. And it allows landlords to 
dispose of property worth less than $1,500 without an order 
from the ORT when a tenancy ends or property is abandoned. 
So there’s a number of different changes, but those are some of 
the big ones that are being proposed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When the minister gave his second reading speech on this piece 
of legislation, he again emphasized that: 
 

. . . the goal of the government with The Residential 
Tenancies Act, 2006 is to provide balance and neutrality 
between the rights and obligations of landlords and the 
rights and obligations of tenants. 

 
He was arguing, “These amendments will make adjustments to 
bring the legislation to balance between rights of tenants and 
rights of landlords,” so again talking about this balance. And at 
the end he also says, “Mr. Speaker, we feel that these 
amendments will help make the process fair and equitable for 
both landlords and tenants.” So he really was emphasizing the 
balance that he believes this strikes, and that’s something that 
I’m going to examine a little bit today as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So some of the specific amendments that he took time to speak 
to . . . He took time to speak to most of the amendments. One of 
them that we’ll be looking at is ensuring the landlords 
“establish reasonable rules prohibiting the possession, use, 
selling or distribution of cannabis or the growing and 
possession of cannabis plants in the rental unit.” 
 
We have to establish these rules and we have to establish these 
lines, of course, Mr. Speaker, but I’m a little bit concerned 
about the phrase “prohibiting the possession,” that simply 
possessing cannabis in a rental property is something that a 
landlord can create a rule about. So this is a big question that I 
have. And also with the fact as it relates to medicinal use, Mr. 
Speaker, because there’s no exemption for medicinal use that 
has been written into the cannabis control Act. 
 
So it’s an interesting dynamic that we’re having to strike here, 
and I’m concerned about landlords establishing rules where 
renters are not able to simply possess a legal amount of 
cannabis in a rental property, even if they’re using it, because 
the question of what damage does that potentially . . . What way 
does that damage the rental property if they’re not even 
considering smoking it in the rental property, but it’s just on 
their person? That is a question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister also talks about section 85 dealing with the 
personal property abandoned by tenants when they leave a 
tenancy situation. Currently landlords cannot sell or destroy that 
property without an ORT hearing. So what this legislation aims 
to do is to change that so that a hearing is not required or a 
ruling is not required. And I understand that there are cases 
where landlords lose out in rental income because of delays. 
These hearings do happen fairly swiftly, but I understand that 
when you’re looking at tenancy on a month-to-month basis, that 
can be lost income. 
 
So I understand that there’s a balance here in terms of the 
landlords missing out on profits, but there’s also a concern on 
the other side from renters, Mr. Speaker, that if a landlord 
claims to have made reasonable attempts to get in contact with 

the tenant after they have abandoned the property but has no 
way of reaching them, there’s concerns that this may in fact 
incentivize landlords selling the property as long as they only 
collect up to $1,500 worth of money, say on Kijiji, when 
they’re selling that furniture off. So there’s concerns about 
incentivizing landlords to collect this money as well. So those 
are some of the first issues that I wanted to identify. 
 
I did mention that I took some time to consult with some 
groups, Mr. Speaker, so I’ll speak to that briefly as well. I spoke 
to some renters in Saskatoon. I spoke to some landlords. And I 
also spoke to some lawyers, and they had a look at the pieces of 
legislation as well, and individuals who are involved in the 
ORT hearings, have been involved in some way in ORT 
hearings. So I was trying to get as fulsome of a consultative 
group as possible. 
 
So I just want to identify some of the concerns that came from 
these individuals. From the landlords’ perspective there 
certainly is a concern with regards to smoking cannabis. I 
certainly heard about that. You know, there’s concerns about 
damage to the property.  
 
And there’s obviously concerns about growing hydroponics and 
all the moisture that can be associated, but I didn’t hear many 
concerns about growing plants in the traditional form of 
growing plants, Mr. Speaker. So I wonder about the inclusion of 
that in this piece of legislation. You know, how different is it 
from a nice marigold that you have planted? You’re putting 
water in, it’s photosynthesizing, and it goes through the same 
process of growing a physical plant. So I didn’t really hear 
direct concerns about that, Mr. Speaker.  
 
I also didn’t hear concerns simply about possession. So I think 
the main concerns I heard were surrounding smoking and that 
that should be included, and additionally heard concerns about 
the exemption for medicinal marijuana, Mr. Speaker, and how 
there’s no specific exemption for these types of users. 
 
[15:00] 
 
So the question is about the framing of, if you choose to rent 
you have to find a landlord that’s going to be friendly toward 
cannabis. And I want to point out the fact that in many cases 
renters are some of the most vulnerable populations that we 
have, that renting is not always a choice, Mr. Speaker. And 
sometimes people are in quite dire situations and don’t have the 
opportunity to choose one landlord over another, maybe just 
because of their physical proximity and the availability of rental 
units, but also because they are limited in their financial means. 
And there are only so many options if you are required to rent 
because of your income. So buying is not an option for 
everyone, especially with the market we’ve seen in the past, 
you know, 10, 15 years, Mr. Speaker. So the argument that you 
can simply choose a landlord that is friendly to cannabis is 
questionable. 
 
There’s also a question about the reasonable efforts to 
determine the whereabouts of the tenants, which I referred to a 
little bit earlier. What are reasonable efforts? You know, if a 
landlord has a phone number and that phone number is 
disconnected, you know, has that been a reasonable attempt to 
contact the individual? And questions about what motivations 



March 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3603 

will be created for landlords. 
 
And I’ve also heard concerns about this legislation from a 
rights-based perspective, Mr. Speaker. You know, the charter of 
Europe includes a provision that people have a right to adequate 
housing. Lots of housing conversations and forums . . . I’m the 
critic for housing, Mr. Speaker. Lots of housing conversations 
and forums right now talk about the way forward as housing is 
a human right. So I’ve heard a lot of this way of framing 
housing over the past six months or so. And I also have a letter 
here and I just want to read some parts of it into the record, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s published on the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission’s website as a news release on December 21, 
2017. And it’s a “Follow up to the open letter regarding 
discrimination in tenancy: next steps.” So I’ll just provide some 
selective quotes here, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Two years today, the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission [SHRC] and the Office of Residential 
Tenancies [ORT] issued a joint open letter about rental 
housing. At that time, and with near-zero percent vacancies 
in many communities, people receiving social assistance 
reported consistent difficulty in finding safe and affordable 
housing, and encountering discrimination when trying to 
secure accommodations. 
 
When that letter was published, the Commission began a 
public consultation process, with the City of Saskatoon 
serving as a focal point. People looking for lodging, 
stakeholders, and service providers came forward with 
their stories, expertise, and insights. 
 
The feedback and preliminary findings corroborate many 
housing-related issues faced by people receiving public 
assistance. This includes: 

 
Lack of affordable housing . . . despite increasing 
vacancy rates, 
 
Receipt of public assistance being used to deny housing, 
and 
 
Disability, race, and mental health compounding access 
to accommodation. 

 
Further ahead in the letter, Mr. Speaker, it says: 
 

To that end, and over the coming months, the Commission 
will meet again with those who have been involved to 
discuss the interim findings and clarify any issues that are 
identified. Following that, the Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Commission and the Office of Residential 
Tenancies will determine stakeholder interest in pursuing 
systemic solutions that can be used to assist, guide, and 
support the housing rights of people in our province. 

 
So there’s quite a bit of discussion about this frame of housing 
is a human right. I’m not sure how it interacts with the proposed 
changes that are involved in this legislation, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, we have heard some movement toward this idea of 
housing is a human right, but it will be interesting to see how 
this impacts us in the future as we start to look to maintaining 
and striking that balance because, as I’m sure you can 

appreciate, a rights-based perspective changes this conversation 
quite a bit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So some final notes that I want to provide just to summarize 
what some of my concerns are here in this legislation. I think, 
first of all, it’s important that we’re striking a right balance 
between the rights of the tenant and the powers of the landlord. 
A lot of what we’re hearing in these changes seems to benefit 
the landlord and to balance, tip things toward their favour. And 
of course I spoke to people from all sides and understand the 
balance that is required there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Putting some restrictions on cannabis in rental units certainly 
makes sense. We want to protect the space that belongs to the 
landlords. And we’ll continue to consult as the official 
opposition to make sure that this legislation does in fact balance 
and make sure that the amendments do make sense. 
 
And finally, you know, I think, it’s fine when government 
wants to look at closing loopholes that may be abused by some 
people in extreme cases. But considering the rarity of these 
cases, one thing we’ll be asking about committee is what impact 
these changes have on some of the most vulnerable populations, 
people who can’t speak for themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When it comes to disposing property that belonged to a tenant, 
we should make sure that landlords are reaching out to tenants. 
I’d be very interested to see what “reasonable attempts to 
contact” is going to be defined as, Mr. Speaker, to make sure 
that those possessions are not simply being disposed of at the 
first opportunity. 
 
So I know that the critic on this file is going to have a lot more 
to say about this piece of legislation, but with that, Mr. Speaker, 
I would move to adjourn debates on Bill 115, The Residential 
Tenancies Amendment Act of 2017. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 115, The Residential 
Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 94 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cox that Bill No. 94 — The 
Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings 
(SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on the 
debate on Bill No. 94, The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for 
Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017. 
Abbreviated of course in these comments, they’re going to use 
SAGES [Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education 
Savings]. So as far they’re using that, SAGES is the 
abbreviation they’re using. 
 



3604 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2018 

But having talked about, I want to talk a little bit about the grant 
and maybe what it did for some families, and we want to get 
into that. We know in the province, the government, because of 
their own problems that they’ve created, the Sask Party 
government has created many challenges for Saskatchewan 
families, for young people, for many people. 
 
And you know, we’ve heard on this side of the House and 
we’ve heard from people out on the doorsteps, wherever you 
go, coffee shops, wherever you go, people saying, you know, 
they’re expecting us to pay more, more, and more and we’re 
getting less, less, less from this government. And some people 
are not happy. Some people are struggling to make ends meet. 
They truly are. They are. I’m telling you, I’ve talked to seniors; 
I’ve talked to families who are struggling. 
 
The government put more PST in collecting, tried to collect just 
about a billion dollars from a so-called, oh we’re not raising 
taxes is what the . . . On one hand they make that sound like it’s 
so great. We’re not raising taxes, okay? But on the other hand, 
the PST on so many things, and they’ve moved it to 5 per cent. 
And they put more struggle on many Saskatchewan residents 
and I guess at the end of the day on families who maybe were 
putting away a little bit of money for education for their kids. 
Maybe it’s grandparents putting away a little bit of money, 
helping out. And everyone’s trying to do their part to help the 
kids, you know, get a good education, hopefully get a 
good-paying job. 
 
But we’re seeing the numbers and we’re seeing what’s going on 
in this government. And I think the government needs to be 
held accountable at the end of the day for years of record 
revenue, for years, you know. And you have many people 
saying the way they handled the mismanagement, some of the 
scandals and waste, people are not happy. And I’ve said this 
before, and I think many people in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
saying we understand. We’re willing to pay our share of taxes. 
People and residents have done that. They’re willing to help 
out. 
 
So having said that, Mr. Speaker, how is it that the government, 
after all they’ve done by burdening Saskatchewan residents, can 
they go to them and say, well not only did we cheerlead that 
we’re not raising taxes, and we made it sound . . . pat ourselves 
on the back, but in the last budget we have seen the PST on 
children’s clothing go from 5 to 6 per cent. My colleagues and 
myself, we have articulated that well, how families are 
struggling out there, many families, to cover medications, rent. 
 
And you know, we have question period. We have also brought 
up about, you know, if you’re looking on foreclosures and stuff. 
And if you look at it, I believe it was 7-point-something the 
leader quoted. So if at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, there’s 
more and more struggles, the struggles are getting harder for 
families to make ends meet. And we know we’re going to have 
another budget coming up, April the 10th. And of course it’s 
always, oh just wait and see. Like I hope for Saskatchewan 
residents, for the seniors, those that have been impacted mostly, 
the most vulnerable. We’ve seen some of the reversals that this 
government has done because of the backlash. And my 
colleagues have articulated it well. We have brought it forward. 
We have shared the frustration, whether it was petitions going 
after this government saying, your budget is damaging and 

hurting many families, many people. It’s not helping with jobs. 
 
So when you look at the industry, restaurants, you look at 
restaurants, you look at all the areas where PST has hurt, where 
they want to brag and they want to pat themselves on the back 
about the great job they’re doing as a government: oh, we’re no 
taxes. But if you look at the end of the day how they’re 
impacting so many families, Mr. Speaker, how they’re 
impacting so many families with the added cost just to survive, 
to provide food, shelter, clothing, rent, just to provide utilities 
. . . We look at the power rates. We look at all those rates. 
These are the individuals, you know. And many of them I think 
will be impacted. 
 
Now as I was talking about it, and I want to get back to Bill 94. 
Talking about people saving a little bit. Well this government is 
going off and digging into everybody — a little more out of 
everybody’s pocket — just keep taking it, just a little more, a 
little more. We’ll charge you a little more. You know, they used 
to say 5 and 10 cents, you know. You know the old story, you 
know, yes, it’s going to cost you five . . . Well now, as we see 
today, they’re even going after their kids’ school juice boxes. 
They want to get two pennies or whatever it is for juice boxes. 
Like they’re going after kids’ juice boxes. 
 
So it just goes to show you where this government is willing to 
go, and the burden that they’re putting on so many families. 
Now I don’t know why, at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, they 
expect Saskatchewan residents to sit and take it and just allow 
the tax after tax after tax affecting them in their pockets. I don’t 
know how they expect the Saskatchewan . . . And they talk 
about that. 
 
And in this one, it says “advantage,” the Saskatchewan 
advantage grant for education savings. Mr. Speaker, they expect 
the public to accept this. They expect this. You see the waste 
that this government has made. Their priorities . . . You have 
seen the priorities that this government says well, you know 
what? At the end of the day, this is our priority. 
 
Well I don’t think the people of this good province who are 
doing the work, whether it’s our seniors, whether it’s working 
families who are struggling to make ends meet and whether 
that’s power rate, utility increases, taxes that they didn’t have to 
have, the government could have done and made the decisions. 
The government at the end of the day is the government that 
decides what’s going to get taxed, where the cuts are coming, 
and they’re doing it. And the people of this province are not 
happy with the way they’re being treated. And this just . . . 
Taking away this grant. 
 
So like I said, whether it’s families, whether it’s grandparents 
putting away money for education for their grandkids or their 
kids . . . And then the government gave 10 per cent. To a max, 
they’d give you $250. But $250 to a family who maybe is just 
barely making ends meet and is trying to help their family, their 
kids, and then the government that matches 250 to a max at 10 
per cent, so if they put 200 away, well you know, we realize 
that. But if you decided to put away $2,500 for your child or 
your grandchild, you would get the max at $250 — $250. 
Maybe some of them couldn’t because, you know, the 
government was taking away from that 2,500 that they were 
putting away because of the taxes on clothing, on kids’ 



March 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3605 

clothing, on all the different areas where this government has 
put more taxes and has raised the PST. 
 
And it is, it is. We talked about, you know, a tax that’s coming 
on Saskatchewan residents every time they move. The thing 
about it at the end of the day, they’re asked, Saskatchewan 
residents, the government is saying to them, you will pay more 
because that’s how it’s going to be, but you will get less 
services. How do you like that? 
 
[15:15] 
 
Well I’ll tell you: people are not happy. They keep seeing it, 
less and less. Cuts everywhere and this government has, you 
know . . . If you look at the list of cuts, whether it comes to 
different ministries, programs, I mean the list goes on. I 
couldn’t even list off everything that they have cut, but yet they 
want us to pay more. The want all of us to pay more and get 
less services. And that isn’t right. That’s not how it works. 
 
So I guess the good people of this province are saying, if you 
would manage the economy well, if you would manage the 
resources that we’ve given you . . . And I’ve said this before. 
The good people of our province have allowed the government 
to be the government of the day. And I remind them, you will 
be judged come re-election. And I know they like doing the old 
heckles and they like laughing that oh, they’ll never elect any 
government but us; we’re the only one. 
 
I can’t wait to see what the people truly will say at the end of 
the day to this government if they continue dealing with the 
way they are dealing. And, Mr. Speaker, the way they are 
dealing with the people of this province’s dollars, and those 
hard-earned dollars that the people are paying in on taxes 
everywhere, how this government will deal with. 
 
So at the end of the day this government will have to wear it 
and they will have to answer to it and I hope the good people of 
this province hold them accountable because we will do on this 
side all we can to hold them accountable. And we will do all we 
can for those residents. So at that point, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
prepared to adjourn on Bill No. 94. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 94, The Saskatchewan Advantage 
Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 95 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 95 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always an 

honour to join in with debate on bills, and today I’m going to be 
talking about Bill No. 95, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 
and Amendment Act. And, Mr. Speaker, when I was reviewing 
the minister’s remarks with regards to the changes to this 
legislation, he indicated that this “will repeal legislation that has 
become outdated or obsolete.” So he must have been really 
talking about The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act. I believe that’s 
very outdated and obsolete. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if you remember, but in 2007 that 
was one of the first pieces of legislation that the previous 
premier was so proud to present because he indicated that that 
was going to change business, the way we did business in the 
province. And it was going to have wonderful results within 
how we encourage business within our province. And in the end 
it hasn’t been shown to be as successful as they I think 
originally were hoping. And I know it had a big impact on 
especially some smaller communities where it wasn’t as 
successful. And that’s where we really need to try to encourage 
some business as well, as we can’t forget about those smaller 
communities. And so, Mr. Speaker, some of the changes within 
this bill will be repealing that Act in itself. 
 
And so I think, Mr. Speaker, it is important to make sure that 
laws remain modernized and up to date. And it is important to 
take that opportunity to look into some of our bills and such. 
And so some of the legislation that’s going to be impacted here, 
the repeal and amendment of the legislation, is The Child and 
Family Services Amendment Act, 2003. And I believe that is 
due to the fact that there was some changes to that Act in the 
not so . . . the more recent years. And so I’m not sure if it was 
due to some of the changes to that bill that just happened last 
year, but this is going to impact that. 
 
The Closing-out Sales Act, Mr. Speaker: there’s some of these 
Acts that I didn’t even know existed. So there’ll be some 
changes to that because of changes that were done before. The 
Community Bonds Act will have some . . . is going to be 
repealed. The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act is going to 
be repealed. And The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act will be repealed. And The Home Energy Loan 
Act is repealed. The Income Tax Act is repealed. The Lord’s 
Day (Saskatchewan) Act, again, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know 
exactly what is entailed in that Act. It looks like it was in 1978, 
was the last time that one was looked into. 
 
The Marriage Settlement Act will be repealed. The Parents’ 
Maintenance Act is one that will be repealed. The Penalties and 
Forfeitures Act will be repealed. And then section 15 of The 
Power Corporation Amendment Act will be also one of those 
areas that will be repealed. The Rural Electrification Act is 
repealed. 
 
Some are amended. So one of the ones that will be amended is 
The Social Workers Amendment Act, and some of that Act will 
be repealed. Section 5 will be repealed out of The Social 
Workers Amendment Act, and section 6 will also be amended by 
repealing a portion of that as well. The Telephones Act is 
repealed. 
 
The Ticket Sales Act will be amended, and so section 4 of that 
Act actually will be repealed. And so they’re going to be 
making some adjustments to subsection 9 with regards to 



3606 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2018 

amending and striking out “4,” and the subsection 10 is 
amended in the portion and striking out “4.” Subsection 10(2) is 
amended by striking out “4.” So there’s some reason why the 
number 4 is being taken out of that one. 
 
The Trading Stamp Act is repealed, Mr. Speaker. I had no clue 
there was an Act with regards to trading stamps, and actually — 
fun fact — my brother and my mom, they have quite the stamp 
collection. And so my mom . . . Like apparently sometimes 
stamps are worth a little bit more if they are actually mailed, so 
she would send us birthday cards and she would be like, keep 
the stamps. So we always made sure we were getting letters 
from our mom because she had to get those stamps back. And 
so she had quite the stamp collection, and they would admire 
each other’s collections. And it was something to really look at 
because I don’t think we take appreciation of that. 
 
Whenever I go buy stamps, I know I make sure to buy whatever 
is new and exciting because they don’t cost any more, so why 
not have some exciting stamps instead of the boring, regular 
ones we normally have? So sometimes, like they’ll have the 
Roughrider ones. I love sending cards to my siblings in BC 
[British Columbia] and have that Roughrider stamp on there. 
 
Or you know, there was a time when they had one about the St. 
Louis phantom light, and that was a really neat stamp because it 
showed a train going through the bridge. And so the phantom 
light is something that makes St. Louis really famous, and it’s 
kind of controversial unless you’re talking to a resident of St. 
Louis. We all know the phantom light is real, and people who 
tried to say that that isn’t real, they don’t know the facts and 
they don’t know the history. And we used to always bring 
guests to . . . Whoever would come and visit us in St. Louis, 
we’d bring them to go see the phantom light and it really was 
something else, you know. And when the train tracks were 
there, the phantom light was really bright but once they took the 
tracks out . . . The light is still there, Mr. Speaker, but 
sometimes it’s a little bit lighter. 
 
And so it was on Unsolved Mysteries, it’s in books, and we 
would have people come and interview us all the time. In fact 
one time we had Radio-Canada come to St. Louis, and they 
wanted someone to give them an interview, and I was the 
person who did the French interview back then when my 
French was a lot better than it is now. So that was pretty 
exciting. So a lot of my uncles and aunts had an opportunity to 
hear me provide that interview, which was really exciting. 
 
So that’s a claim to fame for St. Louis, is the phantom light. 
And so if anyone’s ever interested in going to check that out, 
it’s always something fun that we do. And right now the 
landowner doesn’t like people trespassing on the land to go see 
it, which is understandable, and so you have to be a little bit of 
a distance away and be on the road, because we know it’s just 
wrong not to listen to the trespassing laws. And so we make 
sure that we stay on the road. But we could still see it. 
 
And there was a lot of scientists that came and tested it out and 
they believe it’s potentially some of the gases that are in the 
ground. And I know in BC a lot of places where they have train 
tracks, people will identify that they see phantom lights. So it’s 
not something that’s completely uncommon and so it might be 
something to do with the chemicals, but there is a story that of 

course has come about and the story is, is that the train 
conductor . . . There was a train accident and the train conductor 
deceased and it’s him looking for other pieces of the train or 
whatever the story is — it depends who’s telling it — and that’s 
what the light is, is the train conductor’s lantern. Because back 
in the day, Mr. Speaker, they used to have lanterns on the trains 
and that’s how they would see where they were going and such. 
And it’s not as technology based as it is now. And so that was 
the fun fact for that. 
 
And so the other areas . . . I kind of regressed there a little bit. 
But they’re going to be doing a repeal of sections 8 and 11 in 
The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act and they’re also 
doing a repeal of sections 11, 16, and 24 of The Vehicle 
Administration Amendment Act also, so there’s going to be a lot 
of significant changes. 
 
And so like I was saying, with regards to all of these repeals 
and amendments of legislation, they’re in all different areas of 
the ministries within here, Mr. Speaker. And so this is going to 
take a bit of time to kind of go through all of these Acts and 
legislation to ensure that the changes that’ll be happening aren’t 
going to have major impacts to this legislation later on. And so 
there’s going to be a fair amount of consultation that’s going to 
be needed with regards to the changes to this legislation. And I 
know some of it is basically housekeeping in nature, which 
tends to happen when you’re working at updating legislation. 
 
And so I know the stakeholders too, with regards to these 
different legislation, are going to want to have a little bit of 
input with these changes. And so I am well aware that the critic 
that will be responsible for this will do the due diligence and 
consult with the stakeholders and assure that the changes are 
something that they’re okay with. 
 
And other than that, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s about all the 
information that I want to contribute with debate with this bill. I 
know my colleagues will have a lot more they’ll want to say, 
and I’m sure they’ll get into it with Enterprise Saskatchewan 
like they have before too; they have a lot more knowledge about 
the history of that. And they should really think about the 
legislation that they’re going to put forward and supporting it as 
well. But with that, Mr. Speaker, I will move to adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 95. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No 95, The Miscellaneous 
Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[15:30] 
 

Bill No. 97 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 97 — The 
Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 



March 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3607 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I was going 
to throw to my colleague, the member from Arm River, but he 
threw it back and here we are. Good to join debate this 
afternoon on Bill No. 97, The Arbitration (Family Dispute 
Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, sometimes you get the sneaking suspicion 
that, fixated as we are in this place with the writing of laws and 
the, you know, legislating here at the Legislative Assembly — 
go figure, Mr. Speaker — that you get the feeling that some 
folks out there, say in the Justice ministry, may be very 
interested in sort of building out the books, building out the 
legislative processes that are at our disposal in this province. 
And so not too surprising, this one comes from the Minister of 
Justice and again refines different aspects of the arbitration 
regime in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you know, it’s fair enough and, as 
sometimes happens in caucuses, we’re very much blessed to 
have a couple of great legal minds in our caucus on whom we, 
you know, we count on the counsel. I’m not going to hide 
around that; I state it plainly, Mr. Speaker. But certainly in 
terms of going through this and looking at what is to come in 
committee, which I’m sure will be most interesting, Bill 97, the 
arbitration amendment Act, 2017 seems to be pretty 
straightforward. 
 
Now in terms of different of the things that are accomplished, it 
sets out a definition for a “family arbitrator” and for a “family 
law dispute,” putting a legal fence around what’s allowed for in 
those regards. It reaffirms the definition of arbitrator and 
arbitration agreement as remaining the same, and there’s a 
section added which allows for arbitration for family disputes. 
Family disputes could involve parts of The Children’s Law Act, 
The Family Maintenance Act, The Family Property Act, or the 
Divorce Act. Myself, Mr. Speaker, I’ve only got a more 
involved understanding of one of those Acts, and I’ll not tip my 
hand as to which one that might be, but anyway I’m a lifelong 
improvement process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s also a trend to divert more family disputes to 
arbitration, and certainly, Mr. Speaker, in all seriousness, one of 
the more sort of heart-wrenching, frustrating aspects of the 
adversarial nature of the legal system, the way that that can, 
when overlaid on top of a dispute in a marriage breaking down, 
and when there are kids involved. And, you know, there’s one 
family I knew growing up where the judge threw them out of 
court in terms of the dispute that was going on between the 
mother and father, and how that related to the kids and on. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I always think of that in terms of like benchmarks 
around what are some of the ways not to go, particularly when 
there are kids involved, particularly when we should be able to 
sort these things out. 
 
And the more dispute resolution, the more arbitration, the more 
mediation of these matters that can take place in the legal 
system, I think the better off we’ll be as a society. Because I 
know, certainly in that case, the kids that were involved in that 
particular imbroglio were not . . . you know, it’s something that 
will stick with them for the rest of their lives. But, Mr. Speaker, 

in terms of that movement towards a greater involvement of 
arbitration, mediation, dispute resolution, I think is a positive 
development. And all joking aside about legal counsels in 
various departments, but particularly in the Ministry of Justice, 
looking to write ever more legislation, I think that’s a good way 
to go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll have some access to Justice and access to 
arbitration and arbitrator questions, and we’ll certainly be 
looking to the minister for a greater explanation on the matter of 
implementation of this new aspect of the regime. But those are 
matters better pursued at committee, and again we’ll be looking 
to the wise thoughts from our Justice critic, the member from 
Regina Douglas Park, in that juncture. So with that, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 97, the 
arbitration amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 97, The Arbitration 
(Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 98 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 98 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) 
Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative diverse (résolution des 
conflits familiaux) de 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again today to enter into adjourned debates on Bill No. 98, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) 
Amendment Act, 2017. Quite the mouthful. I’m not sure 
whether many of my other colleagues have been able to say all 
of that in one breath, but I had to take another one. 
 
So I’m pleased to enter into this debate. I did enter into debate 
on Bill 97, which my colleague from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre was just speaking about. So I do have some 
familiarity with how these pieces are linked and how they come 
together and will be speaking to some of my comments on Bill 
97 as well, so that I can read those comments into the record 
because I think that many of them apply here as well. 
 
So this bill, Bill No. 98, in particular the primary focus of this 
bill is to allow for a larger role for family mediators in dispute 
resolution. It adds definitions for “family arbitrator” and 
“family mediator.” It outlines the role of a mediator and it 
provides that evidence in a mediation session cannot be used in 
court proceedings without consent from all parties being given. 
 
So in Bill 97 we talked about the fact that family arbitrators 
were identified and that it provided a process for that to take 
place, and that one of the options is mediation. So Bill No. 98 
sort of decides what some of those rules and regulations are 



3608 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2018 

going to be and what this is actually going to look like, Mr. 
Speaker, at the everyday level. So this is definitely something 
worth speaking about. There’s going to be a lot of repercussions 
for families that are involved and a number of different pieces 
that are up for amendment here today. 
 
So usually I find it useful to go through explanatory notes when 
we’re talking about amendments to legislation because if you 
just go through the Act itself, I find that it takes a trained eye to 
be able to figure out what the first clause was and what it’s 
being replaced with. So actually I sort of read all three of them 
in concert. I have the existing legislation, the explanatory notes, 
and the new bill, and looking at all three of those together you 
can really get an understanding of what has happened. But 
sometimes it’s useful to look at the explanatory notes to see 
what the changes are that are being proposed here. 
 
So a few different pieces of legislation, we’re talking about 
changing The Children’s Law Act, 1997, The Family 
Maintenance Act, 1997, The Family Property Act, and The 
Queen’s Bench Act, 1998. So I’ll just go through and talk about 
what some of the changes are that are being proposed in each of 
these Acts. 
 
So for The Children’s Law Act, 1997, an explanation of those 
changes: section 2 is being amended to revise the definition of 
“agreement” and add definitions of “family arbitrator” and 
“family mediator.” Section 10 is amended to replace “mediator” 
wherever it appears with “family mediator.” There’s no changes 
in substance, these are housekeeping. Section 10.1 is added to 
expressly allow for arbitration in a matter to which this Act 
applies. 
 
There’s a new part that adds provisions respecting parenting 
coordinators:  
 

Section 21.1 adds definitions. 
 
Section 21.2 permits the court to make a parenting 
coordination order directing parties to use a parenting 
coordinator and specify the amount of a parenting 
coordinator’s fees and expenses and which party should 
pay those fees and expenses [which we know is always 
something that comes up. Who’s paying the bill?] 

 
Section 21.3 sets out when and how a parenting 
coordinator may provide his or her services. 
 
Section 21.4 requires a party to provide the parenting 
coordinator with any information requested.  
 
Section 21.5 sets out the matters a parenting coordinator 
may assist with. 

 
And the rest of these changes are in line with parenting 
coordinator and mediator as well. 
 
The Family Maintenance Act, 1997, there’s some explanation 
provided of the changes here, amending definitions of “family 
arbitrator” and “family mediator,” replacing “mediator” with 
“family mediator.” So again, housekeeping changes. And 
“Section 15.1 is added to expressly allow for arbitration in a 
matter to which this Act applies.” 

The Family Property Act is also amended: 
 

Section 2 is amended to add a definition for “family 
mediator.”  
 
Clause 10(3)(a) is amended to reflect that the form is not 
prescribed but provided by the Land Titles Registry or the 
Personal Property Registry.  
 
Section 44.01 is added to expressly allow for arbitration in 
a matter to which this Act applies. 

 
The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 is the last Act that is being 
amended with this miscellaneous statutes amendment Act here, 
Mr. Speaker. And the sections that are amended there, 44.01 is 
added to require that parties to an application participate in 
family dispute resolution. It adds definitions for “family dispute 
resolution,” “family mediator,” and “minister.” It sets out the 
applications to which this section applies, prohibits a party who 
fails to participate in family dispute resolution from taking any 
further step in the proceeding, sets out the powers of the court if 
a party fails to participate in family dispute resolution, creates 
exemptions from the requirement to participate, requires that 
where an exemption is provided by someone other than the 
court, the person completing a certificate of exemption needs to 
file with the court. 
 
So we’re talking about establishing some of these definitions, 
Mr. Speaker, and providing for them in these pieces of 
legislation. 
 
In the minister’s second reading speech on this legislation he 
talks about the different Acts that are being amended and the 
provisions that are being provided there. And he says, “The 
Government of Saskatchewan is committed to encouraging 
early dispute resolution methods in family law matters for the 
timely and cost-effective resolution of family disputes,” saying 
that it might “. . . be more appropriate in resolving family 
disputes . . . [might] be more cost effective, and have less of an 
emotional toll on the parties.” 
 
[15:45] 
 
And as my colleague has already pointed out, sometimes these 
can be very heated sides. The legal process necessarily creates 
sides so, you know, taking families out of a courtroom for that 
conversation can have a positive impact on the parties involved, 
the family members but also on the children, because this can 
be quite divisive for children as well. 
 
The proposed amendments to The Queen’s Bench Act are 
particularly interesting. So this is where it: 
 

. . . will require parties in certain family law proceedings to 
make efforts to resolve disputes through an approved 
dispute resolution process before proceeding with the court 
process. 

 
And this is interesting, Mr. Speaker. If they’re involved in 
certain disputes, they need to make an attempt to resolve those 
disputes before going into the process. If there has been a 
history of violence, a child has been abducted, a restraining 
order is in place, one party may be able to seek an exemption or 



March 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3609 

an exception to this. 
 
But it is interesting to see that we’re going down this path, that 
we’re moving forward on this trend toward dispute resolution. 
As someone with experience in alternate dispute resolution, I 
think it is wise. We are always told in conflict resolution to try 
to solve things at the lowest level. In some of these cases we’ve 
seen that they escalate very quickly, and then suddenly families 
are in court and it can become a quite divisive process. 
 
So there’s definitely I think a role for things like mediation to 
play in being able to not only cut the cost because I know a lot 
of families in family law disputes will be representing 
themselves because of the sheer cost of it. They won’t be able 
to afford to have representation. And you know, taking on this 
weight . . . One of my colleagues has identified especially now 
that the government is raising fees, they will not be able to 
always afford legal representation. So they’re ending up in 
these disputes in court, representing themselves, and this is 
perhaps a way forward that can help to solve some of that. 
 
So the minister says, “This suite of family law amendments will 
assist to promote alternate dispute resolution methods in family 
law matters for the timely and cost-effective resolution of 
family law disputes.” 
 
So we certainly hope, Mr. Speaker, that that will be the result of 
this legislation but, as usual, we think it’s worth taking a close 
look at the legislation to determine whether that will in fact be 
the case. 
 
And as my colleague from Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
identified when he was giving second reading to Bill 98, there 
are some questions about consultation and what consultation 
has taken place here. We did not hear the minister in his second 
reading speech discussing what these consultations are. These 
are widespread changes that we’re talking about across 
Saskatchewan, so I think it’s important to know. And we’ll be 
certainly asking in committee what consultations have taken 
place with respect to this legislation and these proposed changes 
that are coming forward here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know that this is obviously a developing field and there’s 
certainly some promise that it shows, but we need to make sure 
that we are diligent about what the impacts will be on families 
in this province. 
 
I also mentioned that I had the opportunity to speak to Bill 97 
and that some of this legislation applies in similar ways, so I 
want to reiterate some of those thoughts so that they are read 
into the record on Bill 98 as well. So I’m reviewing Hansard 
here from March 19th, Mr. Speaker. So some of the concerns 
that I identified, I talked about the fact that arbitration is still a 
quite formalized process. Even though it sounds less 
formalized, there are still a number of rules that are set up to 
dictate how it takes place. 
 
I already spoke about the option for settling disputes outside of 
court and how this can be beneficial, and it can create an 
opportunity for families, where often emotions are running 
quite high in these situations. So it can be an opportunity to 
resolve things in a little bit more cordial manner. I know we 
probably have all seen some of these family disputes go awry 

and some of the terrible situations that have resulted from that 
as well. So I think any time we can avoid that and make sure 
that our relationships are positive, we’re creating a better 
society for everyone. 
 
One of the concerns that I identified with regards to Bill 97, and 
I’ll echo here, is the concern that for someone to be qualified as 
a family arbitrator, they have to have experience. The minister 
referred to the fact that they have to have experience in family 
law in particular. And I think this raises some concerns for 
access. So we’ll certainly be interested in finding out whether 
there are limitations in access to family arbitrators in rural and 
remote communities and who those folks are going to be. 
Because it is great to create opportunities for people across this 
province, but we don’t want to find that people in larger urban 
municipalities have access to the resources but in smaller rural 
areas they do not. So we’ll certainly be watching to see. 
 
And I think this is particularly an area where consultation is 
important, to find out if these conversations have taken place, 
an initial scan of the environment has taken place to see 
whether these folks are indeed available to help out, especially 
if it’s going to be dictated in some particular processes. So I 
wouldn’t want to see that, you know, something that’s intended 
to be very good for families end up being quite cumbersome, 
require extensive travel, and lead to delays, where this is 
supposed to be a process that does not entail those pieces that 
we would normally associate with going through our formalized 
. . . our court system. 
 
So those were the main concerns I wanted to identify with this 
piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. And I just also want to say 
that overall, you know, we know that there’s a trend to divert 
family disputes to arbitration. We know that it can be 
beneficial. But we were going to have more questions on this 
bill, what it means for mediation of family disputes, what that 
mediation actually looks like, and what access will look like for 
the folks who are involved. 
 
Overall it can be . . . it has promise to be something that’s going 
to be very beneficial for families, but we would like to be able 
to ask those questions. So I know that the critic will have more 
questions as well, and I look forward to my colleagues’ remarks 
on this bill. I would like to, with that, move that we adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 98, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Family 
Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Fairview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 98, The Miscellaneous 
Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 99 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 99 — The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2)/Loi modificative 
no 2 de 2017 sur l’interprétation be now read a second time.] 
 



3610 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2018 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like I said before, 
it’s always an honour to stand here and enter into debate. But, 
Mr. Speaker, this particular bill, it is an extreme honour to be 
able to stand up and provide my thoughts with regards to this 
debate because I know there’s many people that would also 
have liked to have an opportunity, the same opportunity I have 
to be able to enter in some remarks with regards to this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the major changes with regards to this bill is 
because of Bill 40, a bill that was put forward last year and was 
for . . . I believe the pure intention was to get rid of STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company] from our province, 
which was very shameful. 
 
And so the Premier said that he heard the Saskatchewan people. 
People came out in droves and rallies and were wanting to make 
sure that this government understood that they were really 
unhappy with the fact that this government put forward Bill 40. 
And so the Premier said that, you know, we’ve heard you, in a 
Facebook message that he put out to the province on October 
24th and quoted, “Our government is repealing Bill 40.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, just two days after that, he said again that he 
didn’t think wind-down counted, so they’re going to keep that 
part of Bill 40. Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
were upset with Bill 40 because of the fact that it was a 
privatization bill. They claimed when they put Bill 40 in that 
they needed to do this because they needed to define what 
privatization is. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think everybody else in the province 
knows exactly what privatization is, and they didn’t need that to 
be defined, you know. But if that is the rationale to the reason 
for putting forward Bill 40 . . . And now they’re putting forward 
Bill No. 99, which to me is in essence the same as Bill 40. And 
they’re changing a little bit of what the definition of 
privatization is in here, and indicating that a wind-up is not 
included in the definition of privatization. 
 
Where are they getting this definition of privatization? Like, I 
don’t understand where they’re coming up with this. And 
they’re not fooling anyone. The people in Saskatchewan know 
it’s just so that they have a piece of legislation in place so that 
they could eliminate more of our Crown corporations, and 
that’s exactly what this is. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, just the fact that this kind of legislation is 
coming forward, I find this very troubling and I think a lot of 
people in this province do. And people in the province want the 
government to go to them if we’re planning on selling their 
businesses, which all of our Crown corporations are the 
taxpayer of Saskatchewan’s businesses, you know. And we 
need to ask them for permission in order to make changes to 
that. 
 
And so when they eliminated STC, they did that without 
consent of the people of Saskatchewan, which resulted in many 
jobs lost and a lot of adjustment to services. STC provided a lot 
of services to the government which now is going to cost us in 
all these other areas. It’s going to be hard to track, but it’s going 

to, in the end, cost more. 
 
I know in Justice I’ve been hearing a lot of the costs for salary 
for staff with overtime for them to transport inmates here and 
there, or like when they need to go home, having to contract out 
services so that they can make sure that inmates get home to 
their home communities. That’s just been a complete 
nightmare, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For Health there’s been a lot of costs. Like I know with regards 
to transporting different, say medications, like they might need 
to transport chemo meds from Saskatoon to P.A. [Prince Albert] 
or from Saskatoon to another location. And they used to do that 
through STC. They had trained individuals that could do that, 
and it takes specific people who are able to transport that kind 
of stuff. And so now they need specialized people to do that, 
and it will all be privatized. And the costs, I’m not quite sure 
what that’ll look like. 
 
Also I know, with my past of working in the health care system, 
that oftentimes we would send, say, acquired brain injury 
clients back home, which might be in Northern Saskatchewan, 
for a visit. And so send them on an STC bus. They would have 
a worker that would place them on the bus, that you knew that 
they were going to get home safely. And then their family 
members would put them back on the bus and bring them back 
to P.A. And we’d have a worker there to pick them up, because 
we have an obligation to ensure that these individuals are able 
to go visit their family in a safe manner. 
 
But now, now, Mr. Speaker, they’re hiring. They have staff that 
are being paid overtime and meals and mileage, and they’re 
having to drive them up to Buffalo Narrows or all different 
areas of this province. And then they have to hire people to go 
back up there and pick them up and bring them back home, you 
know. And so there’s extreme costs there, too. 
 
With regards to Social Services they oftentimes had, you know, 
maybe people going for visits and Social Services would 
provide that funding. Or if a person is escaping an abusive 
relationship from La Ronge and needing to come to Saskatoon, 
P.A., Regina, to a women’s shelter, that would be provided 
before, but now that service isn’t available. So I don’t know 
exactly how that is being provided now, if in fact it’s a contract 
or not. I haven’t been hearing a lot of details from this 
government of how they’re doing that and what the costs are 
now. But that is also an issue. 
 
And then when we have the forest fires up in the North, Mr. 
Speaker, oftentimes they would utilize the services of STC to 
get people to the other communities. And now that’s not even 
going to be available. And I don’t think all of those things were 
placed as factors of cost-saving measures that was there for this 
government before, that now is going to be a hindrance on the 
government. 
 
But also talking to municipal leaders, they were really put in a 
tough position when they have to send their water samples, and 
the water samples have to get to the next location within 24 
hours or else the sample is no longer valid, and being from 
Creighton and needing to get the water sample down to, I 
believe it’s Saskatoon. And before, they’d put it on the bus and 
get it down there; it would get there by the 24-hour limit. But 



March 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3611 

now then they had to make arrangements to find different ways 
to be able to get that water sample done, and I believe they 
made a deal with Manitoba so that they could get it sent there. 
So how much more is that costing, and that agreement? 
 
[16:00] 
 
And so there was a lot of impacts with regards to the closure of 
STC. And then also when I went to chamber meetings, I heard 
the impact that this was having on smaller businesses because 
we oftentimes forget about the fact that STC was a carrier 
process too, you know. And they were reasonably priced and it 
was real convenient if someone bought something, say in Prince 
Albert, and they had no intentions of driving over to Prince 
Albert to pick up the item, the business owner would be like, 
well I’ll throw it on the bus and it’ll get to you, you know, and 
that used to work. 
 
And I know we dabble in a lot of — we being Darren, because I 
don’t — but dabbles in a lot of fixing cars and doing that kind 
of stuff. So sometimes he would need a car part and it’d be in 
Saskatoon and he’d just phone the car place: can you drop it off 
at STC, send it to P.A.? We’d get it. Now we have to figure out 
who’s going to Saskatoon; when are we going to Saskatoon. It’s 
very inconvenient, you know. And so then we think well maybe 
we won’t buy it from there. Maybe we’ll just do without. Like, 
it has been a real struggle for even my family. And I haven’t 
realized how much I used the STC services until it was gone as 
well, you know. 
 
And it also provided independence for residents. It provided 
them the opportunity if they wanted to go visit family but 
travelling might not be an option, or even in wintertime here, 
when we’ve had some of these, you know, wintery days that a 
lot of people don’t feel comfortable driving in that kind of 
weather, Mr. Speaker. But you knew if you hopped onto the bus 
and you’d get there, and you’d get there safely, and you could 
still be there and visit your family. 
 
And also though, Mr. Speaker, what I found was most troubling 
when I was riding the bus and talking to people who were 
passengers was the people who used it to travel for medical 
appointments, it provided them the independence to do that, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think this has been a real detriment with 
providing residents in Saskatchewan independence. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this Bill No. 99 I find is still really troubling 
because the fact that they’re including the winding up and 
allowing to just eliminate a Crown corporation. I wonder what 
else is on the block because we know that they’ve been slowly 
selling government buildings and trying to make them look like 
they’re not useful anymore. But, you know, taking business out 
of there instead of trying to put more business in there, and put, 
like, government other . . . I know there’s a lot of, in Prince 
Albert for example, there’s a lot of government services that are 
in private buildings paying rent. I don’t know how much that’s 
costing, but if they moved those services to these government 
buildings, that would cost the government less I would think. I 
would think that would be a good problem-solving activity. 
 
But then you also see how with the changes to affordable 
housing, and now they’ve made it more difficult for people to 
be in affordable housing. And then now they’re using that as an 

opportunity to say, well we don’t need this, let’s sell it. Like, 
let’s just sell everything. The whole province is up for sale 
basically, even this building apparently, because it’s one of the 
660 buildings that are being re-evaluated. So maybe it’s not 
being used enough, so maybe will we come back to work and 
there’ll be a for sale sign — sold — and we have no Legislative 
Building anymore. Who knows? We don’t know, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So also, like trying to privatize services that were once offered 
by the Crowns, and slowly just piecing everything away. And I 
know with SaskTel, like now oftentimes . . . I’m an avid user of 
SaskTel and when I’d have issues with my services the people 
who would come were SaskTel employees. I knew them. They 
live in P.A. I know a lot of them. But now when I got the 
high-speed Internet put into the house, it was an Alberta 
company coming in and doing the work, you know. 
 
And with SaskPower, I know there’s been a lot of contracting to 
the private agencies there too, to do services where our 
linesmen and our other people that worked there used to do that 
kind of work. And SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], 
you could see that it’s being privatized just slowly. Like now 
when you could go anywhere to get your car . . . have it 
evaluated after an accident . . . Or I heard that when you phone 
to see what the adjustment would be, oftentimes it’s out of the 
province. I heard that that’s happening too. 
 
So there’s a lot of things happening and we’re hearing about it, 
that’s slowly piecing away from our Crown corporations and 
privatizing this work, and oftentimes it’s out-of-province or 
out-of-country privatization, which is even more troubling. 
 
And then of course, the privatization of health care. We hear 
more and more about this and that being done here and there. 
And I know when I talk to health care workers, they’re really 
concerned about their jobs because they keep hearing that, you 
know, a lot of different aspects of their jobs are going to be 
privatized. And we know already they privatized laundry 
services which now has been at times quite the nightmare. Like 
you need more of this particular item and you used to be able to 
call the laundry downstairs, “do you have this ready” and they’d 
send it back up. But now because you’re waiting for it to come 
from Alberta or wherever it’s coming from — Medicine Hat — 
that if you’re out of bedsheets, well, you’re out of bedsheets, 
you know. So it’s really disturbing that we had a process that 
worked well, employed Saskatchewan people, and provided 
those local jobs and now they privatized that. 
 
Food services, we know food services in the jails were 
privatized and they claimed, well, if you don’t like the food, 
don’t go to jail. But now food services are going to be 
privatized even in this building and food services are . . . 
There’s a lot of word on the street that food services could be 
privatized in the health care system. So what if you don’t like 
the food, don’t get sick? Like, Mr. Speaker, this is getting 
ridiculous. The food services was an appropriate service that . . . 
Especially in the correctional centres, now they’re seeing a lot 
of issues with regards to the privatization of the food services, 
and not only the quality of the food or the quantity of food but 
the fact that the employees there are not trained to the same 
calibre as they were when they were correctional workers. 
 
When they were employed by the correctional services, they 



3612 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2018 

learned about the manipulating factors of inmates, you know, 
and that was a really important factor. And now more and more 
contraband is being brought into the centres, and what’s the 
difference? The privatizing of the food services. So there’s been 
a lot of concern with regards to that. 
 
Privatization of custodial services — we had individuals right 
here in this building providing wonderful custodial services. 
Everything was always pristine and clean and amazing. And 
they weren’t the highest paid individuals, Mr. Speaker. Like, 
they had a wage that might have been a bit over minimum wage 
but basically a living wage, you know. And then now they 
privatized it, asked the same people to reapply for their jobs 
with less pay. Mr. Speaker, that was a slap in the face, and that 
was so incredibly irresponsible. 
 
And we know they’re expanding on this as well with the 
different privatization of all the services. But yet they add three 
more MLAs. They have more ministers than before. They don’t 
mind spending money on that. No, that’s not a problem at all. 
But like, gosh, if we provide someone with a living wage in this 
province . . . 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there was three separate elections, but the 
Sask Party promised they wouldn’t sell off our Crowns. But yet, 
then they scrapped STC, and they did all the things that I’ve 
been talking about here and they’re selling everything piece by 
piece. But that’s different because it’s a wind-down. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, they’re not fooling anyone. Everybody knows 
that that’s privatization and that’s eliminating services within 
our province. The taxpayers deserve to have a say in what 
services are provided here. And if you’re going to sell one of 
their businesses or wind them down, you should be talking to 
them first and asking them, and get a mandate from the public. 
 
So we’re talking about trust, Mr. Speaker. You know, and how 
can the people of Saskatchewan trust a government who says 
that they prioritize these services, but even the minister himself 
in his remarks, the opening remarks when he was presenting 
this bill, said, “. . . Crown corporations support economic 
growth and quality of life in Saskatchewan.” 
 
How are people supposed to trust that that’s something that is a 
priority for this government, when they promise they won’t sell 
off our Crowns but then they passed Bill 40? And then they put 
SaskTel on the chopping block and they scrap STC. And then 
they said they were going to eliminate Bill 40 and everybody 
was like yes, you know, maybe they are listening to us. And 
then two days later the premier said, well maybe just a bit of 
Bill 40. You know, so this was a promise that the premier went 
to Facebook and gave to the people of Saskatchewan, was to 
completely eliminate Bill 40. And I think if they are someone 
that the . . . if they are a man of their word like they say, then 
they should eliminate Bill No. 99 as well, Mr. Speaker. And just 
eliminate that and go to the people of Saskatchewan when you 
have . . . and ask them for a mandate to do any more of your 
privatization schemes. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know the critic with regards to this 
bill will have a lot to discuss. They will contact the stakeholders 
and have consultation with them. And I know my colleagues 
have a lot more to say about, with regards to this bill. And at 

this I am going to adjourn debate on Bill No. 99. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 99, The Interpretation 
Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2). Pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 103 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 103 — The Land 
Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise and enter into the debate on Bill No. 103, An 
Act respecting Actions based on Certain Contracts affecting 
Land, making consequential amendments to certain Acts and 
repealing certain Acts. It’s quite the historic piece of legislation 
that we have before us today. And I might later on take us down 
a bit of a historic review of that from the Law Reform 
Commission because it is quite interesting when it talks about 
something that is so fundamental to quality of life here in 
Saskatchewan, and that is our housing, our land, and how that is 
protected. 
 
And of course this is why we have good government, to make 
sure those fundamentals are treated in a fair, respectful way, 
particularly when it comes to contracts. And I think that if any 
of us have watched that Christmas movie about the land . . . I’m 
going to draw a blank. I’ll come back to it. Anyways, about 
how important housing is for everybody and . . . Okay, drawing 
a blank. I’ll have to . . . By the end of it I’ll remember what 
movie I’m talking about, but anyways, I’ll close with that. 
 
But right now I want to take a minute and talk about what the 
minister said about this Act. He was talking about how, and it’s 
interesting because it is how . . . At the speed of which this 
government can operate here. The 2014 Law Reform 
Commission of Saskatchewan had a report and it was entitled 
Reform of the Land Contracts (Actions) Act. And this piece of 
legislation was based on that. 
 
[16:15] 
 
And of course this piece of legislation is a consumer protection 
Act, but of course in many ways we think of it as much more 
than just a straight consumer . . . Because this is a basic 
fundamental of how we live: our houses, and when we buy our 
homes, how do we have protection from foreclosure when we 
hit rough times? And sometimes those rough times come 
without any reason or any kind of cause that’s due to the 
homeowner. 
 
We think of the . . . You know, and times sure have been 
booming and people have been able to buy houses and do well, 
and then we start to see that time slip away from us. In fact, I 



March 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3613 

think that there’s a stat out there, I was talking to my colleague 
about it, that in Saskatchewan we have three times the national 
mortgage rate in arrears, a stat that we have now. We are at 
three times the national average of what other provinces have in 
terms of mortgages in arrears. 
 
So this piece of legislation is very timely because we have seen 
a boom time, and we’ve seen a time now where we see taxes are 
going up. The cost of living is going up in Saskatchewan. This 
government here seems not too concerned about that, in terms 
of the number of taxes. 
 
And we saw this on Friday where, the end of the week when the 
news cycle is down a bit, they released their new fees that 
they’re going to be charging, some $10 million in new types of 
fees. While they will rationalize it as the fines haven’t gone up 
in a while or the juice boxes are . . . We need to see more 
money go to Sarcan. And all of that on one hand is fair, but I 
particularly went around when I was watching the news on 
Friday night about the juice boxes, and found it interesting that 
actually the money goes to the GRF [General Revenue Fund]. 
And then from the GRF, it goes to Sarcan, that in fact there will 
be a delay for that money. So this is something that we need to 
take a look at and make sure we have a way of protecting our 
citizens. 
 
So the minister talks about it being a consumer protection 
legislation to protect borrowers by requiring lenders to obtain 
leave of the court before starting a foreclosure procedure. And 
we’ll talk a little bit about the stats of that and how high they 
were in the ’30s and ’40s and how that causes kind of 
legislation move. And we’ll go through that. 
 
But he talks about now that we need to modernize it and make 
sure that “The protection is provided as time: time to bring the 
mortgage up to date; refinance or sell the property before 
foreclosure or judicial sale; or if that is not possible, time to find 
alternative accommodation.” And that’s really important, that 
we don’t see people put out on the street. We just don’t want to 
see that happening. And as I said, people may be finding 
themselves in tough times through no fault of their own, but this 
is really something that we need to pay attention to. 
 
Now this Act currently doesn’t apply to farm land. In its 
original state it did apply to farm land, and I can go through the 
history of that a little bit, about what caused the change in 1971. 
And then in the ’80s, the farm security Act came along and 
dealt with the farm land aspect of this. But this was about 
homes. 
 
And so he talks about the new Act would “. . . maintain the time 
and notice provided by the current Act while reducing the costs 
to those involved in the process.” And we’re the only province 
that requires any pre-action process for foreclosure. 
 
And I have to say that the Provincial Mediation Board, from my 
experience as an MLA, and referring people to them . . . I 
actually thought that they weren’t operating anymore, but they 
are apparently operating. And so the Provincial Mediation 
Board, they had really decreased their presence in the consumer 
protection world. They’re a great organization actually, in the 
work they do to help people find their way forward by avoiding 
foreclosures and other bankruptcy procedures, but helping to 

find solutions. I know the people in my riding really appreciated 
the very good work that they did. And so I was pleasantly 
surprised to see that they’re still in operation and that they’re 
still actively involved. 
 
So it talks about plain-language notice of application, which is 
good, for leave to commence an action. And then there’s 60 
days before the hearing date, a very definite timeline, and this is 
really, really good. 
 
And so “The new process will ensure both the borrower and the 
courts have the most up-to-date information before an 
application for leave to commence a foreclosure action is 
heard.” So this is very, very important, and so I think this will 
be something that we’ll have some questions on. But I do want 
to talk a little bit about the history here because I think, you 
know, we go through all these pieces of legislation; we don’t 
really understand where they come from. 
 
And this first was brought into effect back on May 15th, 1943, 
following closely on the heels of the dirty thirties and the Great 
Depression and of course World War II. And these were at least 
as severe as anywhere else, the effects anywhere else in North 
America. The Depression resulted in a total collapse of the 
market, both for commodities and land. And so they needed a 
way of delay, suspend, adjust, compromise, or postpone the 
rights of lenders and creditors, to keep people in their homes 
and on their farms. And so this was a response, a legislative 
response, to give some sort of relief to the debt-oppressed 
farmers. 
 
And so we’re all pretty familiar with that and what happened in 
that time and how there needed to be some action right across 
Canada, right across North America because of what happened 
in the dirty thirties, and the impact on farming and the farming 
practices of the time, and really, really caused the turmoil that 
we’ve all heard about from our parents or our grandparents, and 
the fact that it was very, very tough. 
 
And so this was part of a legislative program that was brought 
in for Saskatchewan’s debt adjustment Act, and apparently this 
bill was part of a series of six bills considered by the legislature 
in April 1943. And the other ones were The Provincial 
Mediation Board Act, to replace the creditor-debtor negotiation 
role; a bill to amend The Limitation of Civil Rights Act, giving 
district court judges the power to vary their own orders and 
grant further extensions of time for payments on seizures under 
lien agreements. And a few others: the King’s Bench, The 
District Court Act and The Moratorium Act. And so it was quite 
interesting. 
 
So the LCAA [The Land Contracts (Actions) Act] was amended 
20 times over its 70-year history. And probably one of the most 
significant times was with the farm Act when we took out the 
farm land and then it went into the farm security Act in the 
’80s. So that’s what it leaves us with now. 
 
But I do want to just for a moment just talk on these stats. Now 
again this report is from 2014 and hopefully now that we’re in 
2018 we can have some more up-to-date stats here. But the Law 
Reform Commission, their consultation paper notes that they 
couldn’t really make comparisons on foreclosures in 1943 
because their stats weren’t available. But if you go back using 



3614 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2018 

the notices of intention received by the Provincial Mediation 
Board from 1977 to 2012, the number of notices peaked from 
the mid-1980s through the early 1990s, reaching a height of 
1,921 in 1990-91. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ll remember quite clearly who was in 
power at that time and what was happening in Saskatchewan at 
that time. And these guys, and even the minister who’s looking 
out to sell 660 buildings, I believe it is, was talking about 
schools and closing schools. Well here we have 1,900 homes 
that were being foreclosed in 1990-91. And so that is not a 
record to be proud of at all. 
 
Now interestingly here, this is the good news — and I see some 
of them paying attention to this — the low happened in 
2008-2009 with only 428 notices of intention for foreclosure. 
Now that’s really a significant drop. So it went from . . . 
[inaudible] . . . and steadily declined to a low of 428. It didn’t 
all of a sudden drop. It wasn’t going along 1,900, 1,900 and 
then whoosh, as sometimes these guys like to believe happened 
in 2007. It was a steady decline to 428. 
 
But the other thing here is this is where I think we have a lot of 
questions. In fact, we’ll be asking some questions about this. In 
2011-2012, 688 notices of intention were filed with the 
Provincial Mediation Board. That’s the notice for foreclosing. 
So my quick math: 428 to 688 is 260 more. That’s almost . . . 
That’s got to be a third if not 25 per cent increase in just four 
years. That’s alarming. And so we need to know what’s going 
on here. And I’ll need to know, has that trend continued or is 
that a one-time only? I’d very much like to know how many 
notices of intention were filed with the Provincial Mediation 
Board in the last few years because, as I said earlier, we see that 
there’s a stat out there saying that we are three times, three 
times the national average in terms of people in arrears in their 
mortgage payments which obviously means that they’re just on 
the brink of foreclosure or getting a notice of foreclosure. 
 
And so this legislation is very, very timely and we’ll have lots 
of questions about what this really means for families who are 
facing some very dire times. And particularly when we saw the 
housing market that we had in Saskatchewan from 2007, 2006 
to 2012-14 — very hot housing markets — and people were 
excited on the one hand if you could sell your house at that 
price but not so excited if you had to buy a house at that price. 
And so the impact now is that we’re seeing this kind of 
situation. 
 
And the other issue I would really like to know more about now 
that I’m thinking about it is the impact on condos and 
particularly first-time homeowner condos who bought into 
condos. And are they finding themselves caught in a market 
where they can’t move on to their second home? You know, 
you can’t move on to your second home . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes, well it’s more than just the market 
because we’ve been working with this for 70 years.  
 
I’d like to say this bill was introduced by Tommy Douglas but I 
don’t actually think it was. I think ’43 would be in the dying 
days of the last conservative government who finally saw the 
light, who read the writing on the wall: they’d better get with it. 
But I think it was the conservative government who brought it 
in first, which is interesting because the conservative 

government realized that they had to do something because the 
housing market and the land market was collapsing, and if 
people were going to come home from the war and expect to 
continue farming or continue to have their home that they left 
their parents in or their relatives, it was going to be an issue. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of questions we have with 
this. It’s a very timely piece of legislation and particularly with 
the budget coming up. Will there be any relief for people facing 
the kind of charges that we’ve had before us or will it be, as 
some holler over, that we will just let the market have its way? 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I am wanting to let us move on to the 
next bill and so I would move adjournment of Bill 103, the land 
contract Act. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 103, The Land Contracts 
(Actions) Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed.  
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[16:30] 
 

Bill No. 104 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 104 — The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017/Code des droits de 
la personne de la Saskatchewan de 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 
join in with regards to debate of Bill No. 104, The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
very important piece of legislation that we have before us. This 
legislation is essential because it promotes and protects 
individual dignity and equality rights, and so it’s a very 
important piece of legislation. 
 
My understanding is that the reason why this bill comes 
forward to us right now is there’s a little bit of housekeeping 
aspect with regards to it. But the biggest change here is that this 
bill repeals and replaces the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
with a new bilingual Act, Mr. Speaker, and that is very 
important. I believe it was something that was brought forward 
from the Charter of Rights, that pieces of legislation such as this 
that really have an impact on each and every one of us in our 
province become a bilingual Act because this will meet the 
needs of the Saskatchewan francophone community and 
improve access for them. 
 
And we know how very important that is in our province. We 
have a large francophone community within Saskatchewan and 
right across the province here, and it’s really important that we 
ensure that we have legislation that will meet their needs as 
well. So, Mr. Speaker, the Human Rights Code is so important 



March 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3615 

because it prohibits discrimination within our province and it 
includes a bill of rights and it makes it illegal for someone to 
violate another person’s fundamental rights and freedom. And 
so, Mr. Speaker, we know that we’ve got to ensure that 
everyone in our province feels that they’re respected and they 
could be who they feel that they are, you know, and be able to 
express themselves of who they are. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I was looking through the Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Commission, their annual report of 2016-2017, 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s very interesting information that they 
provide here. They talk about the numbers of complaints that 
they’ve been receiving in their office. And they play a huge role 
with ensuring equality and rights within our province. And so 
they indicated that there was 444 new complaints in 2016-2017. 
 
So the complaints have been increasing and the number of 
complaints have, well like I said before, have been increasing. 
And so there was 444 new complaints and 141 formalized 
complaints. So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if the increase is due 
to the fact that individuals are now knowing the process of how 
to access services when they’re feeling that their rights and 
freedom have been, their human rights have been affected, or if 
this is something that’s increasing across the board, that 
people’s human rights are not being respected. I like to think 
that maybe more people are knowing the services that are 
available for them, because I would think with our day and age 
that we would hope that that is decreasing within our society 
with more education and more information that is provided and 
that there would be more people who would have deep levels of 
respect for others. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there was also a breakdown with regards to 
the grounds and category of these complaints. The number one 
complaint is with regards to disabilities and access to services. 
And I think that’s really troubling, Mr. Speaker, because we 
need to be more mindful when we’re looking at our buildings 
and such to make sure that they’re readily accessible for 
individuals, you know. And so it looks like the majority of 
those complaints were with regards to employment and not 
having accessibility within their employment. And so I would 
guess that that would maybe limit potential employment for 
people that have disabilities, which I think is a real detriment. 
And we need to be a little bit mindful when we talk to 
employers about ensuring that their facilities are appropriate. 
 
The number two was sexual harassment, and again I find that 
very troubling again because you would think that there would 
be much more gender equality, you know. And that’s 
unfortunate that that’s still an issue with regards to sexual 
harassment in the workplace, because workplace looked like it 
was the highest one too. And the third one was sex and 
pregnancy, which was the third highest amount of complaints, 
and again that was within employment. And so it looks like we 
have a lot more work to do to ensure that employers within our 
province are looking out for people’s human rights. 
 
And so when we look at where most people are having maybe 
some issues with regards to their human rights, like I said 
before, employment was number one and then public services is 
number two, Mr. Speaker. So we have an obligation as 
members of this legislature to ensure that the public services we 
have in our province are accessible to individuals as well. And 

it looks like again disabilities was the first one and then 
ancestry and sexual harassment was tied for number two for the 
most complaints with regards to our public services, which is 
very disturbing. 
 
And then education was number three with again regards to 
disability being number one . . . oh, no, family status being 
number one and then disabilities and a few other ones tied for 
third. So education again is a big part of what we do here in 
ensuring that there’s human rights there and making sure that 
people feel included and that they have all the services that they 
need. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, like I said before, this bill will make . . . This 
bill allows for us to have a bilingual aspect to it, and it changes 
a lot of the language throughout the Act, but a lot of that 
language doesn’t necessarily change the content of it so the 
content is the same as the previous one. 
 
Some areas that we have concern would be like the number of 
complaints coming forward and the fact that there’s been an 
increase in complaints. Another area is the growing number of 
human rights complaints that are dismissed. And I don’t 
understand exactly the reasons why they’re being dismissed, but 
I think there will be definitely some good questions to ask 
within committee, what’s going on with that. And so some of 
these troubling trends, we’ll certainly continue to work with the 
commissioner and remain engaged in the incredibly important 
issues of the human rights. 
 
And so I know the critic that’s responsible for this bill will do 
due diligence and consult with all the stakeholders, and I know 
I have other colleagues who will have a lot of information that 
they’ll want to add with regards to this piece of legislation. And 
so with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move to adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 104. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Prince Albert Northcote has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 104, The Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Code, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 105 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 105 — The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
today to enter into the debate on this topic, An Act to make 
consequential amendments to The Saskatchewan Employment 
Act resulting from the enactment of The Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Code, 2017. Now I’ve already spoken to the main bill, 
but I do want to come back and talk just a bit about the 
consequential amendments and some of the opportunities here 
for us to correct some errors that the government has made, 



3616 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2018 

even though they may seem small. 
 
I was delighted to hear this afternoon the member from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow get on his feet and make a member’s statement 
about transgender week and celebrating that, and that’s a very 
good thing. He’s been out to many of those things and I 
appreciate that. So in the spirit of that and in the spirit that 
we’re here . . . And we’re about, I think, to raise a flag in just a 
few short minutes, and as I talked about then, we still have this 
mistake that we have with pronouns in our legislation. And so I 
was just googling it, and not that I’m any kind of pronoun nerd, 
but it is interesting when you get into singular versus plural, 
first person, second person, third person. I can only remember 
this because I read it five minutes ago. 
 
But it is interesting because we have overlooked the idea that 
pronouns are gender based. And particularly when it comes to 
human rights, we could really lead the way, and this would be 
the perfect bill to correct those errors because clearly there are 
unintended consequences when you fix legislation. And as my 
colleague from Prince Albert said, that this is just a bill to . . . 
They just want to translate into French and collect some 
housekeeping, but you know, Mr. Speaker, when you do that 
you really open the opportunity to say, so what does that mean? 
What does that all entail? 
 
It should mean just the easy stuff, particularly when it comes to 
the Human Rights Code. This is a time when we could take out 
the hes and the shes and replace it with the theys and theirs, and 
that would not be a problem. Language evolves. We all know 
that. We all know that. And I think that as we become much 
more sensitive to others in our society that aren’t identifying 
what their pronouns are . . . And, Mr. Speaker, I would bet 
you’ve been in situations where you’ve had meetings where 
people go around the circle first, introduce themselves, and 
actually give the pronoun with which they identify, whether 
they like to be identified with a he or a she, so all of that can be 
cleared up right at the front. 
 
And so why not this week, this week that we’re celebrating 
Transgender Day of Visibility, that we make this a little mission 
of ours to say, hey, let’s clean this up? Let’s clean this up. We 
can do that. That’s what our job is. It’s not going to change any 
of the legislation, but it’s going to make it look a lot better. 
Especially when people know — and here you have the marker 
— 2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you and I and everyone here knows that the 
transgender issues have been on the forefront for several years, 
several years. It hasn’t just come up last week. So this is a time 
to get it right. You’re having a little marker — Human Rights 
Code, 2017 — with the asterisk. We couldn’t get it right on the 
pronouns. We stumbled before we got to the finish line. That’s 
really unfortunate. We could really get over that finish line and 
do a piece of legislation that we could all say, hey, this is 
cutting edge. This is how you write legislation in the modern 
day and not in the old archaic way, the binary way. And I think 
that we need to talk about it. 
 
Now when I was googling on my phone, of course you do get 
into the old purists of grammar who say, no, they’re only 
singular and it’s either he or she and that’s just the way it is; 
move on. No, it’s not time to move on. It’s time to get it right. 

And that’s what we do here. This is why we have second 
reading speeches like this. And I think, while it is interesting, 
we’re having this piece of legislation because of four digits — a 
two and a zero and a one and a seven — that’s what this bill is 
all about, really, if I looked at it. Because it’s changing from 
“Human Rights Code” to “Human Rights Code, 2017.” That’s 
what we’re doing. 
 
[16:45] 
 
So here we have . . . If we can make a big deal about four digits, 
then certainly we can make a big deal about pronouns. And so, 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know why this would be a problem. And I 
think it would be even considered a friendly amendment 
because it doesn’t change the intent in any way, shape, or form. 
And not that we want to go back to a process where we were in 
the other one where it took us four years or five years to get a 
report back from the Law Reform Commission, the good work 
that they do. I’m not really interested in hearing a historical 
review of the pronoun — singular, plural, or and/or possessive, 
or not. I think that we should just do the right thing here. 
 
So I don’t want to get into the other things I talked about with 
the Human Rights Code because I know we have a couple of 
more bills to do. We have an opportunity to get it right here. 
And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I think that . . . And I am very 
serious about this because I do think that the members over 
there . . . And I know some of them are listening very carefully 
and some of them are lawyers and some of them know that this 
is the time to do the right thing and make sure that when we do 
the human rights consequential amendment Act, 2017, that it is 
the best kind of work. 
 
You know, you don’t want to have unintended consequences. 
And who knows, who knows? We might; we might. People 
have very strong feelings about this and rightly they should. If 
they feel that the binary system isn’t working for them and they 
identify differently, then this bill here doesn’t speak to them. 
And we know, and in the words of the Human Rights 
Commissioner, Judge Arnot, “words matter.” And they do 
matter. So let’s get this one right. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know others will want to speak on 
this issue, so I will move adjournment on An Act to make 
consequential amendments to The Saskatchewan Employment 
Act resulting from the enactment of The Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Code, 2017. I do so move adjournment. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 105, The Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 106 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 106 — The 
Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 



March 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3617 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I’m proud to 
stand here today and add my remarks with regards to Bill No. 
106, The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death 
Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was happy to see this piece of legislation come 
forward. I have to be honest. Not because . . . I don’t really 
know a lot of the details that are being implemented in here and 
I know the critic will have a lot more to say about that. But the 
reason why I was happy to see this come forward is because we 
really need to have these discussions about the missing people 
that we have in our province. And we have a growing number 
of missing people in our province and it’s really troubling. 
 
I participate in the missing and murdered women and men walk 
in Prince Albert as often as I can. It happens every year and I 
try to make it out. And I think it’s really important to show an 
alliance with regards to that because like I said, it is troubling 
that we have so many people who are missing in our province. 
And oftentimes these people, they come from lifestyles that . . . 
They lead more dangerous lifestyles, you know, but it doesn’t 
make it right for them to be missing and perhaps murdered. 
 
And so some people come to mind when I think about this. One 
person that comes to mind is Happy Charles. She’s an 
individual that’s from La Ronge and she became missing in 
Prince Albert. The last time that she was seen was on April 3rd, 
2017. And, Mr. Speaker, I went to a vigil on October 5th of last 
year. I was invited by the family. The whole community was 
invited and went to that. And it took place at the last place that 
Happy was seen, which was outside of a high school in Prince 
Albert. And in attendance of that vigil was her mom and dad 
and her three daughters and her grandchildren. She had five 
children and two grandchildren. 
 
And just listening to the stories from her family and her friends 
was very moving, Mr. Speaker. And if anyone here gets an 
opportunity to attend a vigil like that, I really strongly 
encourage them to because it really puts the fire in your belly 
when it comes to having to find out the reasons why individuals 
become missing like this. And Happy hasn’t been found yet. 
And it hurts me to think how much it bothers her mother, 
Regina, and her children. And her daughter has talked about, 
you know, the one daughter was pregnant and knowing that her 
mom will never see her soon-to-be-born grandchild. 
 
And not too long before that vigil, I lost my mother. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it made me really . . . it put my life into perspective as 
well. My mom was 82 and I had her for 42 years of my life, you 
know. And so for these young ladies not to have their mother in 
their life, it’s very sad, and it really makes you realize the 
importance of making sure we have services for individuals 
who are potentially at risk, you know. 
 
And so when we talk about cuts to mobile crisis in Prince 
Albert, knowing that they don’t have the daytime services there, 
that puts people more at risk as well too. And we’ve got to be 
mindful of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And another person that this piece of legislation reminds me of 

is Timothy Charlette. He went missing October 8th of 2014, 
Mr. Speaker. He’s been missing for almost four years now, and 
his family have been searching non-stop. And I can’t even 
imagine how that is, to be searching for a loved one for four 
years. And I went to school with his sister, Colleen Whitedeer, 
and every year she makes sure that people are paying attention 
about the fact that we have missing Aboriginal men as well, you 
know, in our province. And that’s important as well. 
 
He went missing with his girlfriend, Beatrice Adam, and they 
found Beatrice’s body, but they haven’t found Timothy’s yet 
either. And I can’t even imagine not knowing where your loved 
one’s remains are. And his mother is a constituent of mine, 
Elizabeth, and I’ve chatted with her about the pain for a mother 
to not know where your child is, you know. And even though 
Timothy . . . I believe he was in his 40s, but still that would still 
be really troubling. 
 
And then I think about Danielle Nyland. She was a 22-year-old 
lady from Prince Albert. I know her mother Lori. We come 
from the same small community, St. Louis. And so Danielle 
was missing for a long period of time, but they did find her 
body. But they haven’t found the person who was responsible 
for murdering Danielle. And at 22 years old, to lose your 
daughter . . . And we know Danielle might have been with the 
wrong type of people, but it still would hurt. And they say that 
when a parent loses a child, they never get over that, you know, 
and that’s lifelong. Especially to know that that hasn’t been put 
to rest is very troubling. 
 
And so I see all these family members at the walks that I attend 
and other family members of other missing and murdered 
Aboriginal people. Usually it’s Aboriginal people that we are 
talking about. Danielle was Métis but we also have people from 
all walks of life that are missing and murdered within our 
province here, Mr. Speaker. And it’s really important that we be 
mindful of that and we look at legislation such as this one that 
will have a great impact in regards to allowing our police 
officers the ability to maybe search for them. 
 
And so when I look at some of the changes with regards to this 
bill, I know a lot of the changes are housekeeping in nature and 
updating this piece of legislation, which is important, but it also 
adds a new section that allows police services search orders and 
access to records when conducting an investigation into a 
missing person. 
 
And so like I said before, I don’t . . . I’m very fortunate that I 
have colleagues who have law degrees and they have a better 
ability to look over this legislation and be able to evaluate it. 
And so I know they’ll do their due diligence and consult 
stakeholders and such with regards to the changes. 
 
But I know there was an incident in Prince Albert not too long 
ago that . . . There was a missing woman and she was actually 
in her home, but the police couldn’t have access to her home 
because of some issues with regards to not being able to be able 
to get that search warrant. And so when I sit there and think 
about that, I wonder if this had been in effect if that would’ve 
helped with that process. But we also have to ensure that if 
people are, their records are secure, you know, and we can’t just 
allow . . . all records be allowed to be investigated. But if there 
is due diligence and a reason then that’s really important. 



3618 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2018 

And there also seems to be an emergency demand for records 
that could come from the chiefs of police or commanding 
officers in cases where they believe a person is at risk of 
imminent harm. So I can’t think of potential situations like that. 
I guess maybe in the case of an Amber Alert where the child 
goes missing, then that would be really important to be able to 
search more records in order to determine if they are at risk or 
at harm. And so I think that might be something that will 
change. 
 
So it looks like they’re giving a little bit more power and 
flexibility for law enforcement officers to be able to do their 
investigations. And as long as it still is not infringing on 
people’s rights or if it’s used in the proper context, I think we 
need to make sure that people are safe. Because from what I 
hear, Mr. Speaker, those first few hours are the most crucial 
hours in order to find a missing person. And I know like with 
Happy, now she went missing in spring of last year, so the 
family was searching and searching. And now with winter and 
all the snow that we’ve had, it’s pretty hard to be doing active 
searches now. 
 
So we’ve got to be mindful of the fact that every minute counts 
when you’re searching for a missing person. And I know we’ve 
had some Amber Alerts as well in my community and having to 
search for missing children, you know, and so we want to make 
sure that if anyone’s at risk that we get to them as soon as 
possible. 
 
So like I said before, Mr. Speaker, I know the critic will do their 
due diligence and ask the appropriate questions in committee. 
And I know my fellow colleagues will have a lot more to add 
with regards to discussion with this bill, and so with that I’m 
going to move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 106. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Prince Albert Northcote has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 106, The Missing Persons 
and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, so that the committee can 
sit tonight, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the Assembly be now adjourned. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3589 
  Meili ............................................................................................................................................................................... 3589, 3598 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3590 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3590 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3590 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3590 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3590 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3590 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3591 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatoon Regional Economic Development Authority  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3591 
 Federation of Sovereign Indigenous Nations Youth Legislative Assembly 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3591 
 Purple Day Increases Awareness of Epilepsy 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3592 
 Gender Diversity Week 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3592 
 Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3592 
 First Nation Opens New Band Office 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3592 
 A Busy Weekend in Swift Current 
  Hindley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3593 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Global Transportation Hub and Government Transparency 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3593 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3593 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3594 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3594 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3595 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3595 
 Fee Increases 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3595 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3595 
 Film Industry and Government-Owned Buildings 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3596 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3596 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3596 
 Reporting on Pipeline Safety 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3597 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3597 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Membership of the Board of Internal Economy 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3598 
TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3598 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3598 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 121 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3598 
 Bill No. 122 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2018 
 Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act  
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3601 



 

 Bill No. 115 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017  
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3601 
 Bill No. 94 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3603 
 Bill No. 95 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3605 
 Bill No. 97 — The Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017  
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3607 
 Bill No. 98 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi modificative diverse (résolution des conflits familiaux) de 2017  
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3607  
 Bill No. 99 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2) 
 Loi modificative no 2 de 2017 sur l’interprétation  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3610 
 Bill No. 103 — The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3612 
 Bill No. 104 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017 
 Code des droits de la personne de la Saskatchewan de 2017  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3614 
 Bill No. 105 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 2017  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3615 
 Bill No. 106 — The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 2017  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3617 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


