


















































March 22, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 33A  THURSDAY, MARCH 22, 2018, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3567 
 March 22, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
privilege to introduce two friends of mine seated in your 
gallery. One is Paul Lavoie who is a retired Canadian Tire 
manager from Saskatoon, and his partner, Bill Peterson. Bill 
was the editor of the Saskatoon StarPhoenix from 1987 to 1994. 
Following his retirement from the StarPhoenix he was 
diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease. He went to the Mayo 
Clinic and was told at the Mayo Clinic that he should go back to 
Saskatoon, that the world leaders in treating Parkinson’s were 
in Saskatoon. And he went back to see Dr. Rajput and has been 
getting strong and effective treatment since. 
 
After that he left Saskatoon and moved to North Saanich, and 
he’s in Elizabeth May’s federal riding. I asked him yesterday if 
he had an Elizabeth May sign up during the last federal 
election, and he said he would’ve considered it but there was no 
room in his yard because of the large pro-pipeline sign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on a personal note, I can advise that Bill and Paul 
are good friends. I’ve received political advice from Bill over 
the years and, Mr. Speaker, he bought a turkey. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the minister in welcoming Bill Peterson to the 
legislature here. I had the pleasure of doing my internship as a 
reporter at the StarPhoenix when Bill was still there. But 
following Black Saturday, which wasn’t a great time in 
reporting history, Bill went on to found the Free Press in 
Saskatoon and Regina where he hired me, Mr. Speaker. And I 
had the opportunity to work for the Free Press for a few years 
until I had my oldest daughter, Hennessey. 
 
When Bill moved on to Creative Fire and I was the Co-Chair of 
the children’s museum, he was very kind to sit down with the 
Co-Chair and I and provide some advice in terms of connecting 
with sponsors. But I haven’t seen Bill in a few years, but it’s 
great to see him here today and I’d like to welcome him to the 
Saskatchewan legislature, to his legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce and recognize 
Se-Se-Wa-Hum School from Victoire, Saskatchewan. They’re 
seated in the west gallery. And it’s a real gift for myself to have 
a school group because of the distance that they’ve come. So I 
hope they enjoy the school proceedings today. There’s 28 grade 
9 students. They’re accompanied by their teachers, Marla 

Netmaker, Doreen Netmaker, the educational assistants Dallas 
Joseph, Anya Whitefish, and the bus driver, Donnie Dreaver. I 
hope they enjoy their day today. I’ll be meeting with you later. 
So please help me welcome Se-Se-Wa-Hum School to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Hindley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of the great 
communities of Shaunavon, Swift Current, Frontier, and 
Climax. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of concerned citizens as it relates to the 
underfunding and the cuts to post-secondary education by the 
Sask Party. 
 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 
 

These petitions today are signed by concerned citizens of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition calling on the Sask Party government to stop 
the cuts to our classrooms. Those who signed the petition wish 
to draw our attention to some of the following points: to the fact 
that despite having an additional $67 million in education 
property tax collected last year, there were cuts totalling over 
$55 million to classrooms across this province. Of course, Mr. 
Speaker, those cuts have had devastating impact to classrooms 
and students and families around the province, such as those 
that we heard yesterday in this Assembly. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and stop making 



3568 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2018 

families, teachers, and everyone who works to support our 
education system pay for this government’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition reside in 
Canora and Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member of Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. And 
the people signing this petition want to bring to our attention the 
following: that Saskatchewan’s outdated election Act allows 
corporations, unions, and individuals, and even those living 
outside the province, to make unlimited donations to our 
province’s political parties. And you know, Mr. Speaker, that 
the people of Saskatchewan deserve to live in a fair province 
where all voices are equal and money can’t influence politics. 
 
And this is something that really draws a lot of attention from 
the government. Every time I stand, they have a particular 
interest in this petition. And we know that over the past 10 
years, the Saskatchewan Party has received $12.61 million in 
corporate donations, and of that, $2.87 million come from 
companies outside Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan politics should belong 
to Saskatchewan people, and that the federal government, the 
provinces of Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and now 
British Columbia have moved to limit this influence and level 
the playing field by banning corporate and union donations to 
political parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign finance laws, 
to end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 
from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 
on individual donations. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
yet again in this House to present a petition calling on the 
government to appoint a seniors’ advocate. Mr. Speaker, the 
petitioners point out that the concerns of Saskatchewan seniors 
have not been a priority of this government. They point to the 
cuts as recently as the last budget around the hearing aid plan, 
podiatry services, shuttering STC [Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company], increasing long-term care rates, 
increasing drug costs for seniors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The petitioners point out that Saskatchewan does not have 
legislated minimum care standards for long-term care, and even 
despite continued reports — one of their own just a month ago 
— and concerns from families on the issues in long-term care, 
the Sask Party government has failed to ensure quality of life, 

safety, and dignity for seniors in long-term care. They also 
point out that other provinces have a seniors’ advocate who 
successfully works to ensure seniors have the supports they 
need and deserve . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’m so glad 
they’re very interested in the prayer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They point out, Mr. Speaker, that the petitioners . . . Petitioners 
point out that a seniors’ advocate would provide vital support 
for seniors and their families across the province. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to immediately appoint a seniors’ 
advocate to ensure the rights of seniors are upheld and that 
all seniors across the province have the supports they need 
and deserve. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Hindu Society of Saskatchewan 
Hosts Annual Banquet 

 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On March 17th I 
along with many of my colleagues, including the Premier, 
attended the Hindu Society of Saskatchewan’s 33rd annual 
vegetarian banquet in Saskatoon. It is a day for the Hindu 
Society to celebrate its contributions to communities across 
Saskatoon and Saskatchewan. 
 
The evening was filled with inspiring speeches, including an 
address from the High Commissioner of India to Canada, Mr. 
Vikas Swarup; wonderful food; and awards for members of the 
society who serve as role models in community service and 
leadership. The Indian vegetarian cuisine was very well done, 
and I thank the hard-working staff and volunteers for organizing 
this great evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province is proud of its diverse culture, and 
events like this are a great time to come together and learn more 
about each other’s backgrounds and traditions. What started as 
a small group of families who were immigrants to 
Saskatchewan has grown decade by decade to be a strong 
society, deepening their family roots right here in our province, 
sharing the practices and lessons of the Hindu culture. 
 
It was also an important night to strengthen and solidify this 
province’s strong relationship with the country of India. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all members to please join me in thanking the 
Hindu Society of Saskatchewan for this wonderful banquet. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 



March 22, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3569 

Snowlandia Outdoor Program Held in Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to tell you about Snowlandia, a SaskOutdoors program 
designed for girls ages 10 to 12 to encourage outdoor winter 
adventures with experienced, supportive teachers; to learn about 
winter ecology and nature stewardship; to develop leadership 
skills; and to enjoy making new friends. 
 
Despite the recent frigid temperatures, the 10 participants spent 
much of their February school break outdoors embracing our 
Saskatchewan winter. Snowlandia is a single-gender program to 
encourage participants to step forward in a space uniquely 
carved out for young girls to develop their own leadership style. 
 
The recent program offered two days of winter adventure in 
Saskatoon’s Gabriel Dumont Park and two days in Holiday 
Park in my constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale. Focused on 
learning to stay warm and dry, implementing first aid, and 
enjoying winter pursuits like snowshoeing and cross country 
skiing, participants also spent some daily hours indoors for 
lunch, reading, crafts, and drying mitts, scarves, and toques. 
 
Experienced outdoor leaders accompanied and taught winter 
outdoor schools. Jana Miller from Wildernook Fresh Air 
Learning facilitated the program with the help of Rebecca 
Basset from Back 40 Wilderness First Aid, and Sam Gunn from 
the outdoor school program, who shared their expertise while 
teaching new skills and ensuring the safety of all participants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking 
SaskOutdoors and these experienced outdoor leaders for 
developing a fun and healthy program for the education and 
enjoyment of young girls in Saskatoon. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 

Last Mountain Distillery Recognized at 
Canadian Whisky Awards 

 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
three years ago Last Mountain Distillery developed a 
single-cask, 100 per cent rye whisky at their distillery in 
Lumsden and left it in a barrel to age. Last month this rye 
whisky netted the distillery a gold medal at the Canadian 
Whisky Awards in Victoria, BC [British Columbia]. 
 
The company was also awarded two bronze medals, one for its 
Canadian whisky and the other for its cherry whisky. And 
perhaps most significantly, the company was chosen as this 
year’s best North American craft microdistillery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much like their whisky, Last Mountain Distillery 
came from humble beginnings. The distillery was launched in 
August 2010 by Meredith and Colin Schmidt in their garage in 
Lumsden. Meredith and Colin originally met in the United 
States while Colin was playing hockey. And after his hockey 
career concluded, they decided to move to Saskatchewan to 
start this new venture. Today they have a 9,000 square-foot 
facility also in Lumsden. These humble beginnings only make 
all this success even more impressive, and like any good 
whisky, as their company continues to age, I have no doubt 
they’ll only get better. 

Mr. Speaker, on behalf of everyone in this Assembly, I’d like to 
congratulate Meredith and Colin and everyone at Last Mountain 
Distillery for winning these prestigious awards and wish them 
the very best moving forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Cheers. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Small Homes Exhibit Featured at 
Saskatchewan Science Centre 

 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every year the 
Saskatchewan Science Centre hosts an exhibition which is 
unexpected, visually beautiful, and thought-provoking. This 
exhibition is meant to focus attention on local people and 
businesses doing inspiring work and in turn stir scientific 
curiosity in Saskatchewan. 
 
This year’s exhibition created by John Robinson of Robinson 
Residential Designs Inc. meets all these criteria and more. It’s 
called Canada 150 Small Homes. Like tiny houses, small homes 
require a more modest lifestyle. The simplicity of tiny houses 
and their mobility is really inviting for many. They’re easy to 
maintain, easy to keep clean, and of course, cheaper. Small 
houses are gaining popularity for many of the same reasons, 
except they’re geared to a more permanent location. 
 
The Canada 150 Small Homes exhibition challenges our 
traditional views of housing based on assumptions of size and 
space. It asks provocatively, “How much space do we really 
need to be happy? Can less space actually improve our lives?” 
 
Mr. Speaker, John Robinson created this innovative project as a 
tribute to Canada’s 150 years, and includes floor plans from 13 
unique small homes, 3-D printed models, and some very 
beautiful pieces of art based on the designs. These floor plans 
represent our 13 different provinces and territories. Mr. 
Robinson describes them as “a perfect mix of art, design, and 
technology.” Mr. Speaker, I encourage all members and the 
people of Saskatchewan to check out these creative designs and 
thank the Science Centre for their role in inspiring curiosity. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Moose Jaw Warriors Win Scotty Munro 
Memorial Trophy 

 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to send 
congratulations to the Moose Jaw Warriors, who won their 
fourth East Division title, as well as winning their first Scotty 
Munro Memorial Trophy as the 2017-2018 regular season 
WHL [Western Hockey League] champions. 
 
This is the first-ever Scotty Munro Memorial Trophy for the 
club. This past ’17-18 regular season serves as the best in 
Warriors franchise history. They finished their regular season 
with a record of 52 wins, with 109 points through 72 games. 
From start to finish this season, the Warriors found themselves 
among the top clubs in the Canadian Hockey League as they 
were placed in the top 10 for the vast majority of the year. 
 
I would also like to congratulate Jayden Halbgewachs, centre 



3570 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2018 

for the Warriors, who was named CHL [Canadian Hockey 
League] Player of the Week on March 14th, and won the Bob 
Clarke Trophy as the WHL’s top scorer in the eastern 
conference, as well as Player of the Year with 70 goals and 59 
assists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Warriors have headed into their playoff rounds 
as they push closer and closer to solidifying their spot at this 
year’s 100th Mastercard Memorial Cup, which will be held here 
in Regina this May. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to please join me in 
congratulating the Moose Jaw Warriors on a successful season, 
and wish them the best of luck in this round of the playoffs. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Basketball Teams Advance to Provincial Finals 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Davidson 
senior boys basketball team has had a very impressive year. In 
conference 8, held in Coronach March 9th and 10th, Davidson 
beat Coronach 87-71 in the final game. This past weekend, they 
won the 1A regional semifinals, which was held in Buffalo 
Narrows. This win allows them to advance on to the provincial 
finals, which will be held this coming weekend in Prince 
Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my nephew Clay Murfitt is also a member of this 
team. This team of dedicated and hardworking players is 
coached by Kim Rettger, along with assistant coach Luke 
Edwards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another team in my constituency, the Kenaston 
senior girls basketball team, will also be heading to the 
provincial finals as well. 
 
Like many sports teams in rural Saskatchewan, these kids, 
along with their families, have put in endless hours and 
countless miles traveling to tournaments and games in their 
quest to qualify for provincials. This dedication to their sport 
and honest display of school spirit is a part of what makes our 
province of Saskatchewan as great as it is. 
 
It is with immense pride that I wish good luck to not only the 
Davidson and Kenaston teams, but also to all the teams this 
weekend as they head to the provincial championship 
tournament. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Martensville-Warman. 
 

Opposition Claims 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the opposition 
may have a new leader, but it’s the same old NDP [New 
Democratic Party]. Mr. Speaker, the new Leader of the 
Opposition promised to do politics differently. Yet just 
yesterday the member for Saskatoon Nutana, their leader’s sole 
supporter in caucus, stood in this Assembly and alleged that the 
government held a secret meeting last weekend at a Regina 
hotel. Well, Mr. Speaker, there was no secret meeting. And just 

like the mayor of Regina stated yesterday, there have been no 
formal or informal talks to sell the GTH [Global Transportation 
Hub]. 
 
The NDP have a history of making unfounded allegations in 
this place. The member from Regina Rosemont once accused 
the former premier, Brad Wall, of accepting a trip to Mexico 
from a Regina developer, and we all know that that was 
inaccurate. The very next day the member from Regina 
Rosemont had to stand in this House and apologize for his 
statements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just like the old NDP, their new leader is all talk 
and no action. And while he promises to do politics differently 
and bring a greater level of decorum to this House, it took less 
than two weeks and the NDP are back to their old tricks of 
drive-by smears, shoddy research, and making accusations with 
no facts to back them up. It’s weak leadership, Mr. Speaker, and 
the same old NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina Rosemont showed 
character when he apologized for his comments. Will the 
member for Saskatoon Nutana show the same character, stand 
in her place, and apologize for her outrageous accusations? 
We’re about to find out. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Rail Transportation Issues 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, while they were championing the 
scrapping of the Wheat Board, the Sask Party ignored warnings 
of inevitable logistical problems for producers. These backlogs 
were only made worse when they cut grants to shortlines. But 
we’re glad that they now are seeing the light and we look 
forward to the discussion this afternoon. 
 
We agree with the government’s call for federal action on 
interswitching options and join them in calling for quick 
passage and implementation of C-49 to address these issues in 
the future. But, Mr. Speaker, more needs to be done now. 
We’ve written a letter calling on the federal government to take 
immediate action and also implement joint running rights that 
would allow grain companies to use CN [Canadian National] 
and CP [Canadian Pacific] tracks to choose the fastest option.  
 
Will the Sask Party government join us and sign this letter so 
we can have a united call for federal action needed to end this 
backlog? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, this was raised with the Prime 
Minister when he visited the legislature here just a number of 
days ago. Mr. Speaker, I raised this along with a number of 
other issues pertinent to the economy and the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In addition to that, I’ve spoken with a number of individuals 
within both CP and CN, our major rail lines in the province of 
Saskatchewan here, Mr. Speaker. They’ve made all sorts of 



March 22, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3571 

assurances that they are increasing their capacity, Mr. Speaker, 
and ensuring that not only can they address the grain that we 
need, the product that we need to get . . . It’s more than grain, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s potash and it’s refined fuel products as well 
that need to get to port. And they’ve assured us that they can 
address that volume and address the backlog, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ll wait to see, and ensure that they do, and we’ll hold their 
feet to the fire, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the longer term solution to this, Mr. Speaker, and the start 
of it is Bill C-49, Mr. Speaker. And the Minister of Agriculture 
and myself, the Minister of Infrastructure did discuss this the 
other day. And C-49 is beyond helping this crop year, Mr. 
Speaker, so we need to ensure that we add some amendments to 
it to get it right. Amendments such as interswitching, Mr. 
Speaker, need to be put into Bill C-49, as well as some 
volume-based allocations and other issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as well we need to always advocate for other modes of 
delivery of our products, Mr. Speaker, such as the safe and 
efficient pipelines that are approved by the federal government 
need to be built, supported by the Leader of the Opposition and 
the Premier in Alberta, the Premier in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, I would invite the members opposite to encourage 
their Leader of the Opposition in this province to get on board. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that the Premier is placated 
by kind words from the federal minister and from the rail 
companies, Mr. Speaker, but I’m afraid that producers need 
more than that. We need action, and that’s what we’re calling 
for. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s cuts to health care, 
education, and supports for the vulnerable are hurting families 
all across this province. Yesterday we heard from the family 
that has struggled to find the right supports for their daughter 
with autism. Earlier we heard from someone affected by the 
cuts to special diet funding for people with disabilities. And 
Chief Louie Mercredi is speaking out about the lack of mental 
health supports in the North. 
 
The Sask Party won’t commit to putting these needed supports 
in place, but there’s no limit, no limit on what they’ll spend on 
the GTH. How can the Sask Party justify cutting supports for 
people across this province while wasting so much public 
money through their bad management of the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of questions 
in there, ranging from the Global Transportation Hub to 
supports in the North, Mr. Speaker, to what I think was some 
conversation around the increase in supports that we have 
experienced in this province over the last 10 or so years, Mr. 
Speaker. And I may single that out and speak to that in the spirit 
of co-operation, if you will, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I understand that the Deputy Leader of the Opposition’s father, 
Ray, is watching, and I want to ensure that we have a good 

conversation here today. As well as we have members from a 
school up in the northern Saskatchewan where I think from time 
to time my mother, who is a retired teacher, may show up at 
that school and others in the area. And I would be very 
concerned to not be on my best behaviour and have someone 
tell my mother next week when she’s teaching, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the fact of the matter is, is the investment in health care 
here in the province of Saskatchewan over the last 10 years, Mr. 
Speaker, is up significantly, Mr. Speaker, across the province. 
We have doctors working in our communities across this 
province. Part of our mental health care approach, Mr. Speaker, 
are access to those physicians, nurse practitioners in 
communities right across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have increased our education funding in this 
province most recently with another seven and a half million 
dollars, annualized to a $30 million investment, Mr. Speaker, to 
ensure that we have those supports in our classrooms for our 
next generation, Mr. Speaker, that are down visiting today, 
representative of the youth across the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 40 new schools, 25 more major renovations — 
this is the record of the Saskatchewan Party government. More 
to do but, Mr. Speaker, we are proud of the investment that we 
have in communities, youth, and our health care across the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not just my father and the 
Premier’s mother who are watching today. It’s the people 
across Saskatchewan, people who can’t get their kids into 
special needs programs, people who have had their diets cut 
while they struggle with disabilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the question was this: how can they justify all of those cuts 
while wasting so much money on the GTH? Those answers 
simply don’t cut it. They have no one else to blame but 
themselves for their heartless cuts and their bad management. 
And they are the ones who cut funding and supports for kids in 
the classroom. They are the ones who chose to make cuts in 
health care that are making wait times longer, and cut care for 
our seniors. And they are the ones who chose to raise the PST 
[provincial sales tax] by a billion dollars and hike power bills 
and double the debt, Mr. Speaker. That’s all on them. This mess 
is entirely of their own making. And instead of choosing to 
invest in things that matter for Saskatchewan people, they have 
chose to squander millions — millions, Mr. Speaker — at the 
GTH. 
 
How does cutting health care, education, and supports for the 
vulnerable make any sense whatsoever while the Sask Party 
continues to waste millions at the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That 
question crossed about nine different ministries, Mr. Speaker, 
so I’m going to try to address the one that came up first, Mr. 
Speaker, on what we’ve done as far as our poverty reduction 
strategy, Mr. Speaker. 



3572 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2018 

I think first and foremost what we’ve done is taken 112,000 
people off the provincial tax rolls, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
looking for some numbers, Mr. Speaker: a thousand new child 
care spaces that we’ve implemented since 2007; $253 million, 
Mr. Speaker, that we’ve increased in income assistance. We’ve 
almost tripled the amount of money that’s gone into income 
assistance. In all of our programs, Mr. Speaker, we’re very 
proud of our record that we’ve done with the most vulnerable 
people. 
 
Is there more work to be done? Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. But 
we look forward to working with our stakeholders and our 
community-based organizations and our leaders to be able to 
get that work done. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
[10:30] 
 

Management of Global Transportation Hub 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I can understand that the Sask 
Party is starting to get nervous about the mess at the GTH and 
that they would do anything to make all their problems and all 
our questions go away. But a fire sale to the city of Regina isn’t 
going to solve anything, Mr. Speaker. The most notable thing 
the GTH has managed to do over the last few years is to build 
their debt to $37 million. And after all of the downloading the 
Sask Party has put on to the city of Regina through cuts, 
abandoning their responsibilities for grants-in-lieu funding, the 
last thing the city needs is another download of problems from 
the Sask Party.  
 
So besides some hare-brained scheme to slough the GTH off 
onto the city of Regina, what is the minister’s plan to turn 
things around at the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we spent a good portion of 
yesterday’s question period trying to deal with the rumours that 
were going around about the secret meeting, when really we’re 
having a turkey delivery program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to put anything on what the members 
opposite want to ask questions about. But, Mr. Speaker, today I 
would like to give that member the opportunity to apologize to 
the people of Saskatchewan for having misled them about what 
took place last weekend. Because, Mr. Speaker, nothing took 
place last weekend. And I would ask that member to stand in 
her place today and say there was nothing there, whatever 
background they had does not exist, and give them the 
opportunity to set the record straight with the people of 
Saskatchewan that there was no meetings, no discussion. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, people would have heard Mayor Fougere on 
the radio and on the television yesterday saying there was no 
discussion, formal or informal. Mr. Speaker, what there was, 
after David Fraser asked the question, I phoned Mayor Fougere 
and said, you can anticipate there may be a question from them. 
So that’s the level of the discussion there was at an informal 

level, and I’d like to give them the opportunity to stand up and 
set the record straight. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, day after day I’ve asked that 
minister the same question. Again, no answer today. What is the 
plan to get the GTH back on track? And the minister has no 
answer about how to get the GTH back on track. Saskatchewan 
people . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’d just ask the members 
to be patient; the question is coming. 
 
Saskatchewan people have to foot the bill for this 
multi-million-dollar pipe dream, this multi-million-dollar pipe 
dream of Bill Boyd’s. And even though he is long gone, the 
GTH and all of its problems are still around. Giving the GTH 
away is not going to allow the minister to get out of this hot 
water, but neither is denying that a meeting did happen. After I 
brought it up yesterday . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Listen, 
listen. Did the minister look into the situation? And today, will 
he tell us — yes or no — has there been a meeting of some 
kind, at some level — formal or informal, on a plane or in a 
train, in a box, with a fox — at the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, some of the 
meetings that I had on the weekend were with the members 
opposite because some of them were at the same Hindu event 
that I was at. Another one of the meetings that I had was with 
my wife in the vehicle as we were driving around delivering 
turkeys, thinking about how the NDP were doing. Mr. Speaker, 
I answered the question yesterday. There was no meetings. 
Nothing happened. There’s no discussion with the city of 
Regina. Period. Full stop. End of discussion on that point, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Like any other real estate development, you pay the costs on it 
before you start making money out. Whether it’s the cost of 
buying land, building roads, providing services to it, doing 
subdivisions, whatever else you need to do, you pay for those 
costs first. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the Global Transportation Hub, 700 acres are 
sold. There in total is 1,800 acres out there, so there are 1,100 
acres left to sell. Mr. Speaker, it is making progress slowly but 
steadily. Mr. Speaker, the economy has slowed down in the last 
two years, but we will continue to work with them. And do you 
know why we’re doing it, Mr. Speaker? Because of the 860 
full-time jobs that are out there, because of the $485 million in 
private investment, because of the 4,800 trucks that move in 
and out of that facility every week. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Classroom Supports 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, let me set the record straight on this 
point: my question was to the Premier. And the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve an answer from that Premier. How can 
he justify cuts to kids who have special needs and require 



March 22, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3573 

special pre-K [pre-kindergarten] programs while they’re 
wasting money hand over fist at the GTH? That’s the question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, the beginning of the 
questions talked about cuts to education, Mr. Speaker. Not five 
weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, our Premier stood in the rotunda of 
this legislature, announcing seven-and-a-half million dollars in 
mid-year funding, Mr. Speaker, for education to support 
children in the classroom, Mr. Speaker. That will annualize to 
$30 million, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve made commitments to 
continue to have our ongoing dialogue and discussion with 
teachers, with school board trustees, Mr. Speaker, with parents 
so that we can continue to work to support children in the 
classrooms, Mr. Speaker.  
 
That’s the record of this government, Mr. Speaker — record 
investments in capital, record investments in operating over the 
years since this government has been in these chairs, Mr. 
Speaker — and we’ll continue to do that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Costs and Benefits of Carbon Capture and Storage 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, those kinds of questions and that 
lack of transparency is nothing new. For years the Sask Party 
has bragged and bragged about how great the carbon capture 
plant at BD3 [Boundary dam 3] is. But we know the real story 
now. Four years later it’s still working only at 61 per cent of the 
time. And now we found out that in the past year alone its 
operation and maintenance costs have skyrocketed to almost 
$27 million, and that isn’t even for the full 12 months, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s up $5 million from the year before, and these 
costs have increased every single year. 
 
So can the minister tell us just how much money are they going 
to keep throwing at their carbon capture project? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, only would the members opposite think that capturing 
2 million tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions and sequestering it 
safely underground would be a bad thing. Only the members 
opposite would think that 500,000 vehicles, the equivalent of 
500,000 vehicles being taken off the road, Mr. Speaker, would 
be a bad thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite know that SaskPower, in 
terms of operations, maintenance, and administration, is a 
company that spends well over $600 million a year in this area. 
We have facilities all across the province that require 
maintenance, Mr. Speaker. And the members opposite should 
also know, Mr. Speaker, that BD3 has been operating at 100 per 
cent since January 19th, Mr. Speaker. We’ve have a successful 
run over the last number of months where the plant has been 
fully operational, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is technology that, if we’re really interested in 
actually reducing emissions, this is technology that’s actually 

going to do it in a world that is not going away from coal today 
or tomorrow or next year. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, these guys just don’t want to talk 
about money. I can’t figure that out. The costs — the costs — 
this is what we’re talking about. No answer. Costs are out of 
control for 2016-17. They estimated their operation and 
maintenance costs at $14 million, but that grew to well over $25 
million. We get 7 million back in education, but they grew the 
debt there over $11 million, Mr. Speaker. This isn’t chump 
change. 
 
It’s interesting, but that’s not something we hear from the 
member from Estevan’s statements. The Sask Party’s inflated 
bragging about CCS [carbon capture and storage] never seems 
to include how much money this project keeps costing the 
people of Saskatchewan. Now in the TD’s [Toronto Dominion] 
economic forecast, here’s what they say. And I’m going to 
quote: 
 

Going forward [and this is in Saskatchewan], household 
finances will continue to be constrained by rising interest 
rates and a 3.5% increase in electricity rates, which marks 
the third increase in two years, and a total hike of 12%. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, can that minister tell Saskatchewan families 
and businesses how many more power bill hikes they should 
expect for the Sask Party’s mismanagement of this project and 
all of the rising costs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, certainly what we’re not going to do is take the 
position of the members opposite and bring forward a carbon 
tax in this province. What we’re not going to do is stand by and 
wave the white flag and ask the federal government to impose a 
carbon tax. And what we’re not going to do is accept a legal 
opinion by another jurisdiction without relying on our own 
constitutional lawyers within our own branch of the Ministry of 
Justice. That’s not what we’re going to do as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, who has been known from 
time to time to maybe get her information incorrect, she put out 
a news release not that long ago, and she said, “. . . it hasn’t 
even captured half of its one billion tonnes per year target . . .” 
Mr. Speaker, 1 billion tonnes per year target? That’s more than 
this entire country emits in a single year, Mr. Speaker. So again, 
the facts were not correct from the member opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member also referenced a document from the 
Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer just last week. What 
she missed in that is, and I quote, “A number of sectors would 
potentially benefit from its ongoing development and 
deployment . . .” meaning carbon capture and storage, Mr. 
Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, this is technology that we’re 
pioneering here in the province, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to 
focus on technology. We’re going to focus on a 
made-in-Saskatchewan plan, Mr. Speaker. The members 
opposite can get on board with that plan or get out of the way. 



3574 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2018 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Release of Information on Oil Spill 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, one year ago tomorrow the Sask 
Party wrapped up its investigation into the Husky oil spill and 
turned its report over to the prosecutors. This was a major 
environmental disaster where more than 200 000 litres of oil 
flowed into the North Saskatchewan River. Communities along 
that river valley had to go days without regular access to safe 
drinking water. 
 
But one year after handling the report off to prosecutors, there’s 
still no sign of that report that the Sask Party promised to make 
public. Spills are not good for the environment and they’re not 
good for the industry either. Secrecy is even worse. 
Saskatchewan people and our customers need to know, need to 
have faith in the processes. So when will the Sask Party keep 
their promise and release the report? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, officials, along 
with Husky and community partners, took action immediately 
once the spill was detected. The cleanup was completed in the 
summer of 2017. The members opposite, I believe, will know 
that over $1.1 million was reimbursed to the government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Justice is still reviewing the 
case, and it would be certainly appropriate for that report not to 
be released until after the Ministry of Justice makes their 
determination. And yes, I do want to also add it’s the 
Saskatchewan Ministry of Justice, not other provinces, that 
we’re relying on for this legal information. 
 
But I would say this, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the government 
has taken action on this file because what we do is we . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member from Elphinstone 
may want to listen. We release publicly any incidences through 
the IRIS [integrated resource information system] system so 
that it is publicly reported. This is a far cry from when that 
member was the Environment minister, Mr. Speaker: 300 000 
litre spill November of 2004 near Lloydminster, no public 
notification; a 171 000 litre spill March of 2004 near 
Kindersley, under that minister, no public information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re working to improve The Pipelines Act in 
this province, and we’re publicly disclosing all of that 
information. And I hope the member has another question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
becoming more and more clear that we can’t count on the Sask 
Party to give us the straight goods or follow through on a 
promise. They won’t come clean on the GTH. They won’t 
answer questions about Boundary dam no. 3, and they won’t 
give us answers on the Husky spill. 
 
Back in 2016 we asked the government for copies of the 
inspection records of the Husky pipelines. These are public 
documents. They promised to release them and the Sask Party 

was reprimanded by the Information and Privacy Commissioner 
for refusing to turn them over. Still nearly two years after the 
spill, there’s no sign of those inspection records. Will the 
Minister of Energy and Resources table those inspection 
records today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, again, there is an 
investigation under way. The investigation has been complete 
and Justice is reviewing that to determine which, if any, charges 
will be laid. And, Mr. Speaker, once that is complete, Mr. 
Speaker, then we can provide an answer to the member 
opposite. 
 
But in terms of transparency I just want to remind the members, 
we provide, every week, information on any incident through 
the IRIS system, unlike the members opposite: a 1.65 million 
litre oil spill April of 2006, no public notification; a 1.3 million 
litre spill in January 2002, no notification. Mr. Speaker, there’s 
times where that member was the Environment minister — 
spills, no notification. The time that the member from 
Athabasca was the minister, no public notification.  
 
Although, Mr. Speaker, we did find one notification. July 13, 
2004 when the member from Saskatoon Centre was the 
Minister of Environment and I quote, “Saskatchewan 
Environment has learned . . .” This is a news release, so they 
publicly notified. “Saskatchewan Environment has learned that 
a recent storm resulted in the spill of an oily substance into the 
North Saskatchewan River, originating in Edmonton.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, they never publicly notified anybody of a spill 
unless it was somebody else’s spill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
[10:45] 
 

Second Bridge for Prince Albert 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, last week I offered members 
across the chance to stand up for Prince Albert and support a 
second bridge. But instead, he tried to claim that their lack of 
action is justifiable because the previous government “. . . never 
spent a dime on repairs of the bridge.” Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
fact is, and the minister can check this on his own government 
website, as recently as 2005 the NDP contributed 4.3 million 
dimes in that year alone. So will the Premier, will the Premier 
do the right thing and correct the record for the minister, the 
member from Prince Albert Carlton, and will he commit to a 
timeline for a second bridge for Prince Albert? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had the 
pleasure since being minister, I’ve met with the city council of 
P.A. [Prince Albert]. They came down and had a meeting with 
me. We talked about the second bridge. We have taken a 
position in the Government of Saskatchewan that they can seek 
federal funding for a second bridge. We’d be a partner and they 
would be a partner also, Mr. Speaker.  



March 22, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3575 

We have invested over millions of dollars into the bridge. We 
have just recently put sensors on the bridge, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
working with the city on the maintenance of that bridge and 
those sensors will stress test every load that’s going over that 
bridge, Mr. Speaker. We are working with the city; we are open 
to meetings with the city on the bridge and the maintenance of 
the bridge. The city’s in charge of that, and we reciprocate and 
compensate them for the work on the bridge, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, facts are facts, and the fact is 
the bridge was built while the NDP was in government. The 
government of the day worked with the city to develop the 
50/50 funding agreement for its maintenance. This agreement 
has been in place for 60 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now the members opposite can’t seem to get their 
opinions, let alone their facts, straight when it comes to the 
second bridge. We have a member from Prince Albert saying 
one thing and the Minister of Highways saying another. On 
March 14th the member from Prince Albert told paNOW that he 
only supports a second bridge if there is federal P3 
[public-private partnership] dollars involved. Then when 
questioned about a second bridge at last week’s SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 
convention, the Minister of Highways said, and I quote, “A 
second bridge for P.A. is not on our radar at all right now.”  
 
So are they even thinking of building a second bridge or not? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my previous 
answer, Mr. Speaker, we have met with the city officials from 
the city of P.A. We have said as Government of Saskatchewan 
we will partner with the city of P.A. for a second bridge when, 
if they want to seek funding from the federal government. 
We’ve even offered, Mr. Speaker, that the Ministry of 
Highways’ officials will work with the city in making the 
application and working with the application with the city of 
P.A. if they want to proceed as a partner in a second bridge, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 175 through 177. 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 175 to 177 is tabled. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River. 
 

Delays in Rail Transportation of Commodities 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is going 

to be a great debate to have and I plan on moving a motion at 
the end of what I’m speaking here, Mr. Speaker. talking about 
grain movement in Western Canada — not just Saskatchewan 
— and it’s a very important topic that needs to be discussed. 
And when I say discussed, I talk about disgusting because it’s 
disgusting some of the things that we’ve had happen with both 
CN and CP and the fact of moving our grain. 
 
You know back in 2013-14 the farmers in this province lost a 
lot of money. Actually it was up to $6.5 billion in lost sales. 
CNCP [Canadian National and Canadian Pacific] said that this 
would never happen again. They claimed it was due to, you 
know, the winter weather, things like that. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t know how they can say that because it seems that we have 
winter every year in this province. Global warming hasn’t taken 
off good enough yet unfortunately to help out on the movement 
of grain in the wintertime.  
 
But they said it wouldn’t happen again, Mr. Speaker, and it did. 
And this winter, back in December, CN went down to 57 per 
cent of the orders being filled. CP was down to 76 per cent. But, 
Mr. Speaker, that was just the beginning. It gets a whole lot 
worse. In week 31 CN hit 32 per cent of their demand and CP 
hit 52 per cent. And they thought they were doing good, or we 
thought they were doing good at that time only to get that much. 
Because in week 29 CN was down to less than 20 per cent of 
their cars; CP, 43 per cent. Meanwhile in Vancouver, nine 
vessels were loading and 20 were anchored. In Prince Rupert, 
one was loading and four were anchored, Mr. Speaker. You 
have to realize that our Canadian farmers, our Saskatchewan 
farmers, are paying demurrage on all these ships. 
 
This is absolutely unacceptable, absolutely unacceptable. The 
fact is, Mr. Speaker, I was talking with the Deputy Speaker this 
morning, and I happened to look at his tie. And he had a bunch 
of anchors on this tie that he’s wearing today. And I said, what 
are all the anchors on that tie for? And he says, it’s for all the 
ships that are parked out in Vancouver harbour that are all 
anchored there because they can’t get loaded, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government has to move on this. They 
have to put some teeth into Bill C-49. And I don’t know what it 
is about the Liberal government that we have down there. They 
won’t move on pipelines, or very little. They won’t move on 
helping us ship our grain. It’s almost as if they want to try and 
break Western Canada, Mr. Speaker, and I’m putting a lot of 
the blame on the Liberals. I would also like to see that the NDP 
here would help support us on this, and I’m kind of guessing 
that they will actually go along with this motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can give you some personal things, like Arborfield which 
is in my constituency — actually Arborfield’s my hometown — 
has a small grain company called Linear Grain. Now their 
major export are oats, and most of those oats actually go down 
to the States. Well just a little while ago, they had 65 cars 
loaded with oats waiting to be shipped. They couldn’t get them 
out. They couldn’t get them out. And what happened back in 
2013-14 when they couldn’t get them out? They ended up . . . 
They had contracts that they were committed to, and they had to 
start shipping this out by truck, which gets very expensive, just 
to fill their contracts. And they were actually losing money on 
every single truckload they had going town to the US [United 
States]. 



3576 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2018 

Very fortunate up in our neck of the woods to have two 
shortline rail companies. We have Thunder Rail and Torch 
River Rail, and, Mr. Speaker, they do a fantastic job but all they 
can do is take it out to the main lines. Then they are captive to 
CN and CP. We need Bill C-49 to get through the House. 
Actually we need some more teeth put into it. And the federal 
Liberals have to look at what’s going to happen there. 
 
And I can tell you all sorts of stories about how our two rail 
companies are holding us at ransom, Mr. Speaker. About a half 
a dozen years ago there’s a shortline running from . . . Or there 
was a line, not a shortline, it was a CN line running from 
Crooked River over to Hudson Bay, and CN put it up for 
abandonment. And what happened was I don’t think they 
expected anybody to go after that line. Well at that line, 
Thunder Rail and two more shortline companies went after that 
line and all of a sudden CN said, oh no, we’re not going to put it 
up for abandonment. We’re going to take it back out of 
abandonment and we’re going to fix it. And actually I met with 
a couple of CN people right here in Regina and they promised 
me that they were going to put that line back in good running 
order and run on that line. Mr. Speaker, needless to say, 
nothing’s ever been done on that line but they won’t put it back 
up for abandonment again. I say, use it or lose it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has taken many actions on this 
. . . But I can see I’m going to run a little bit short of time 
because I want to ask precisely, precisely what the NDP has 
done on this end of it. What have they done to talk to their 
counterparts, to their federal people, to their federal leaders, 
their federal NDP? Because part of the problem is their leader. 
Their leader is dead set against pipelines, Mr. Speaker. And 
when their leader is dead set against pipelines, he’s going along 
with the Liberals and trying to get pipelines not approved. And 
what is happening is CN and CP are shipping oil by rail, which 
happens to be about four and a half times worse, accident wise, 
than pipelines. But yet what’s the NDP doing here on that? Are 
they going to follow their federal cousins and go against the 
pipelines also? I would almost think so because well, you know, 
you can go right to the Leap Manifesto, who the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana thinks is a great thing, where you don’t want 
any pipelines and just leave that oil in the ground even though 
it’s very important to the province of Saskatchewan, along with 
our grain, along with our potash. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to quote the leader from the 
NDP down in Ottawa. And I’m going to quote here, and he 
said, “I’ve made a really clear no to Kinder Morgan and Energy 
East.” He also said, and I quote again: 
 

So if an energy project is proposed that’s going to increase 
our emissions, then it’s not in line with what we want to do 
as a nation in terms of reducing our emissions, then it’s 
also a project that doesn’t satisfy that criteria. 

 
And I’m going to do another quote: 
 

With respect to Kinder Morgan, outside of the three 
criteria, it’s also something that’s going to have a 
significant and potentially devastating impact on the 
coastal region. And that’s also something of grave concern. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, are they going to follow their federal cousins 

and do that? 
 
But I will say one thing, the Leader of the Opposition has come 
up with a great way to make our grain movement go simpler 
because, in all the promises that he made that also they never 
funded . . . And by the way, I happen to have this here. I know 
that yesterday the NDP got a pledge of these promises, five and 
a half billion dollars that was never funded. And he said, to 
protect our farm land and pastures, by providing incentives to 
producers who want to produce for local markets, use fewer 
pesticides, or diversified food production. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, he wants us all to go into organic 
farming. Well I guess we could do that. And if we all went into 
organic farming — which I’m sure the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana would be very happy about — if we all went into 
organic farming, we’re only going to produce about 25 per cent 
of the grain. So therefore, under the NDP’s great thoughts, this 
would make shipping grain way easier because we only have to 
ship 25 per cent of the grain out of this province out to the 
ports. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And people would starve. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Of course we have to worry, yes, we worry 
. . . And the member from Yorkton just mentioned it properly. 
People would start starving. Yes, this is a great thought put 
behind on the NDP but of course, you know, they didn’t factor 
in that to do this just for their starting cost would be about $18 
million, Mr. Speaker. It’s just another one of the things that the 
NDP never ever cost factored in to all of their promises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we have to do is we have to get the NDP on 
side to talk to their federal counterparts to be able to help push 
our movement of grain forward, and get it done. 
 
[11:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go to some of the things that our 
government has done, and I just lost that chunk of paper. I’ll 
find it here in a second. I’ve got it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t know if I’m going to have time to get through this 
before I have to make my motion, Mr. Speaker, but let’s just 
start out with what was done on this side of the House, from our 
people. 
 
August 22nd of 2017, our Ag minister met with the 
Saskatchewan Barley Development Commission to discuss 
transportation issues. August 30th, 2017, the deputy minister of 
Agriculture met with the port of Vancouver to discuss West 
Coast capacity growth potential. August 2017, the Minister of 
Agriculture, and Highways and Infrastructure, sent a letter to 
the standing committee on transport, infrastructure and 
communities, identifying Saskatchewan’s concern with the 
Transportation Modernization Act, Bill C-49, before it started a 
review of the bill in September. August 28th, 2017, Agricultural 
Producers Association of Saskatchewan wrote a letter to federal 
Transport Minister Garneau with concerns about closure of 
producer car loading sites in Saskatchewan. 
 
September 11th to 14th, 2017, the standing committee on 
transport, infrastructure and communities held hearings on Bill 



March 22, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3577 

C-49. October the 5th, deputy minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure, Agriculture, and Economy met with Mark 
Hemmes to discuss grain transportation, railway operations, and 
Bill C-49. October the 12th, Minister of Agriculture, and 
Highways and Infrastructure, sent a joint letter to the federal 
ministers of Transport and Agriculture regarding CP Railways’ 
closure of 10 producer car loading sites in Saskatchewan. 
Ministers suggested an abandonment process be applied to 
producer car loading sites that are similar to abandonment of 
metropolitan spurs and sidings. 
 
October the 12th, deputy ministers of Highways and 
Infrastructure, Agriculture, and Economy met with CP to 
discuss grain transportation, railway operations, winter plan, 
and federal Bill C-49. October 16th, deputy ministers of 
Highways and Infrastructure, Agriculture, and Economy met 
with CN to discuss grain transportation, railway operations, 
winter plan, and federal Bill C-49. 
 
It continues on and on. It goes right up into . . . I’m going to 
have to skip some of these. On December the 4th, ministers of 
Agriculture, and Highways and Infrastructure, sent a second, 
stronger joint letter to the federal Minister of Transport 
regarding the asking for legislative changes to be made to the 
process for abandonment of rural sidings so producer car 
loaders and shippers and municipal governments would have an 
opportunity to purchase the siding. December the 5th, the 
minister attended a meeting with CP Rail to discuss its 
involvement with Saskatchewan and potential for intermodal 
freight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been going through this. Our ministers 
have been working very hard to try and get this through. But, 
Mr. Speaker, we were held captive to CN and CP, and we were 
also held captive to our federal government, which doesn’t want 
to do anything. And I truthfully don’t think that we’re getting 
any help from the members opposite. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what I would like to do is I would like to 
move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Canada to 
pass an order in council, including minimum movements 
and interswitching options, to help address the 
transportation backlog of all commodities, and further 
supports the implementation of Bill C-49, the 
Transportation Modernization Act, to address this issue 
from occurring in the future. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Carrot 
River Valley: 
 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Canada to 
pass an order in council, including minimum movements 
and interswitching options, to help address the 
transportation backlog of all commodities, and further 
supports the implementation of Bill C-49, the 
Transportation Modernization Act, to address this issue 
from occurring in the future. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to rise 
today and enter into this debate I guess, Mr. Speaker, with 
regard to the transportation, rail transportation of grain in this 
province. I’ll read the motion: 
 

This Assembly urges the Government of Canada to pass an 
order in council, including minimum movement and 
interswitching options, to help address the transportation 
backlog of all commodities [important point], and further 
supports the implementation of Bill C-49, the 
Transportation Modernization Act, to address the issue 
from occurring in the future. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when I read that I had to make sure that my 
mind wasn’t playing tricks on me, so I looked up the definition 
of “debate.” This is the definition I found: “a formal discussion 
on a particular matter in a public meeting or legislative 
assembly [I think we tick that box] in which opposing 
arguments are put forward.” Mr. Speaker, I think on that point 
we may have failed to meet the definition. There’s no debate 
here. 
 
As you heard in my questions today, my letter to the minister, 
we concur. This is needed; it’s past needed. And we hear every 
day from farmers around this province, from producers who are 
struggling, struggling to get their grain, get canola to markets. 
And the risk, so many risks, Mr. Speaker, with regard to 
international reputation, for example when we can’t deliver 
contracts on time, at a time when we’ve seen producers hit by 
other setbacks like the tariff on pulse crops in India, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I’m afraid . . . I’m sorry if the member from Carrot River 
was looking for a debate. He’s not going to get one, but he’s 
going to get some observations from me, Mr. Speaker. I noticed 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well semantics, Mr. Speaker. 
The Minister of Health apparently thinks that it’s very 
important to come in here and talk about semantics today when 
I think we really ought to be putting our attention on some more 
important issues. And in fact that’s going to be the bulk of my 
comments here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I heard the member from Carrot River get up and I believe I 
heard him blame the federal Liberals. I heard him blame the 
NDP in Ottawa and the NDP in Saskatchewan. I heard him take 
credit for a list of things that they had done including news 
releases by APAS [Agricultural Producers Association of 
Saskatchewan] and the standing committee, Mr. Speaker, but I 
didn’t hear a lot of responsibility taken by members opposite on 
this. 
 
The fact is they have been in government for over a decade. 
This issue is not new. This issue cost Western Canadian 
producers billions of dollars back in 2013-2014. And you know, 
I’m going to read fairly extensively from an article that I came 
across. This is written two years ago so it’s almost like Back to 
the Future and it’s almost like the person who is writing this 
article was clairvoyant. Because they outline some of the issues 
that we are dealing with today with great accuracy. 
 
Using some reports by Quoram Corporation, of course the 



3578 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2018 

2013-14 crop year was a disaster. With some changes made, 
there was some improved movement in 2014-15. But there was 
a caution there that governments, that grain companies, that 
they not rest on their laurels because they predicted at that point 
that this day would come again if we didn’t get some things 
right, including the passage of bill 49 but other measures as 
well. 
 
So I’ll go . . . This is from Wade — I’m sorry if I’m going to 
mess up his name — Wade Sobkowich, executive director of 
the Western Grain Elevator Association, saying, this doesn’t 
mean that the system is fixed. Now is the time . . . Remember, 
Mr. Speaker, this is in 2016. 
 

Now is the time to prepare for the inevitability of demand 
for rail service from all industries converging at a high 
point again. 
 
If those forecasts are accurate then long-standing systemic 
. . . failures will re-emerge. 

 
Well guess what, Mr. Speaker? Here we are, and we have the 
same old excuses and finger pointing. We have finger pointing 
from the member, from the members opposite. We have finger 
pointing from the rail lines. And guess what is happening 
again? Those products are not getting to market on time. We are 
not meeting our contracts. And farmers are left wondering how 
they are going to pay to put the crop in the ground again this 
year, and it’s unacceptable. 
 
We’ve heard excuses like, it’s winter. And I concur with the 
member from Carrot River. If we’re surprised that we have 
winter in Saskatchewan, then someone hasn’t been paying 
attention. But we’ve also heard, I heard Ian Boxall speaking 
before the committee — there was a tweet that went out earlier 
this week — very eloquently. This excuse was started back in 
October where we’re using excuses about winter in October, 
well before the snow even started to fly. This is not solely an 
issue of weather. This is an issue, this is a political issue of will 
and, I have to say, a failure to get the job done by all levels of 
government. And it is unacceptable. 
 
So the member will get no debate from me that this needs our 
urgent attention. Many days, Mr. Speaker, we sit in this 
Assembly and we talk about things that maybe people at home 
find a bit silly and inconsequential. This has great consequence 
to our whole province. Anyone who’s been near a farm knows 
how important it is to get that product to market and get the 
cheque in the bank. We have contracts that have gone unfilled 
for months. And you have so much anxiety, concern on the 
farm with regard to how you’re going to get a crop in the 
ground. 
 
And even if there is a grant program or some lending available 
to producers, that still doesn’t meet the other problem and that 
is our international reputation to actually deliver these contracts 
on time, Mr. Speaker. And that is a risk to all producers in this 
country and something we can ill afford to lose, our reputation 
as being a reliable source of food for people all around the 
world. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we would love to do our part. We are willing 
to do our part to do what we can to lend our voices. But let’s 

remember, members opposite earlier were talking about waving 
a white flag. That’s what I’m hearing from these comments, Mr. 
Speaker: it’s not our fault; it’s the federal government’s fault; 
it’s the federal NDP’s fault; it’s CN, it’s CP’s fault. This is a 
matter that people need to put their big-boy pants on and stand 
up and get the job done, Mr. Speaker. And sometimes there’s 
room for debate, there’s room for, you know, the back and forth 
here, Mr. Speaker. But we need the grown-ups at the table to 
get a job done, and maybe don’t get away from the table until 
we actually come up with some action. Because all of the nice 
words and all of the intentions are lovely, but at the end of the 
day they’re just that if you can’t actually get that grain, get that 
canola to port. 
 
You’re right, it is unacceptable that we’ve got vessels sitting 
moored at a cost to the producers, sitting there waiting to be 
loaded and we can’t deliver it on time. Mr. Speaker, as I’ve 
said, there’s no debate on this side. We will do whatever we 
can, if you need us to attend a meeting with you, if you need us 
to write more letters, to write more news releases. We did write 
a news release this year, I believe it was in February, calling on 
action here. I know that Minister MacAulay was here earlier in 
the week sitting right here. I didn’t know that it was solely up to 
us to get this done. I would have tapped him on the shoulder 
and, you know, told him how important this is. But I assumed 
that the minister and the government was doing their job there. I 
assumed that they were making sure that our voice, the voice of 
producers, the voice of this province was being heard. But we 
are very happy to enter into that and help you out, and it does 
sound like perhaps the member for Carrot River is suggesting 
that they need a little help from us. We’re happy to provide it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is nothing . . . I’ll go back to this article again. Again this 
is not . . . If anyone’s surprised that this crisis has come up 
again, they shouldn’t be. They shouldn’t be surprised. They 
should be no more surprised than the fact that we had snow 
again this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again I’ll just go back to my opening remarks that were 
these. This is a 75-minute debate. I understand, Mr. Speaker, 
but there really is no debate from us. Let’s get things moving on 
those rails. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course now, Mr. 
Speaker, with the news this morning, I don’t know if we can 
call you Mr. Speaker; we might have to go to just Speaker. 
 
Thank you to the members of this House for the opportunity to 
speak on this very, very serious situation of grain transportation. 
The situation as it stands is as follows: as per usual, the farmers 
have their bins full of grain, a pile of bills are due this spring, 
and no way of getting the grain to market. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote Daryl Fransoo of the 
Western Canadian Wheat Growers, and I quote, “A lot of 
farmers are taking out more debt to pay off more debt. A lot of 
farmers are hurting.” 
 



March 22, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3579 

Ian Boxall, the vice-president of the Agricultural Producers 
Association of Saskatchewan said, and I quote: 
 

The blame rests largely on deep operational cuts that 
reduced both manpower and locomotives. 
 
“The fact that we’re talking about this again is quite 
ridiculous.” 
 
“We get winter every year in Canada, the railroad should 
know that after operating for a 100-plus years. Using 
winter as an excuse to me is a scapegoat for them. They 
need a better plan in place to move our products in winter.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, I could read off many more quotes. The statement 
ag producers are trying to make is the situation of grain 
movement is critical, Mr. Speaker — critical. It’s not a new 
situation; it seems to be a yearly thing. The farmers have 
high-quality products that the world wants. The markets are 
waiting for our products. We have booked our grains for sale. 
The only problem is getting it to market. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a young man in my hometown of Middle 
Lake and he has his railway engineer’s ticket. He tells me he 
can’t get work with either CN or CP, so it’s not a shortage of 
operators. When I travel around Batoche constituency and also 
travelling back and forth to Regina, I see up to half-mile long 
stretches of parked railway cars. They’re not at a siding to be 
filled. They are parked in a stretch of the line. This 
unfortunately is not an occasional sighting, but a regular 
sighting. 
 
So it’s not a shortage of railway cars; it’s a shortage of 
movement by the railway. We have two railways in Canada, but 
most farmers only have one choice, and they are being held 
hostage. 
 
In the Leader-Post the other day, CNCP said, “The focus is on 
clearing the backlog of grain.” My question is: when? Did they 
not know we had a bumper crop this year? It is March, and now 
they’re focusing on a backlog? Mr. Speaker, this seems to be a 
common occurrence. 
 
We should also look at the history of grain movement. Getting 
grain to ports by rail has been a problem longer than anyone 
here can remember. That includes even the member from 
Cannington. Even I can remember in the late ’60s, that grain 
would finally start moving after spring seeding. We were 
hauling in last fall’s crop. The trucks were lined up 20, 25 deep 
at every country elevator. I wonder if the World Wheat King, 
Seager Wheeler from Rosthern, had that same problem getting 
crops to market. 
 
We are known as the breadbasket of the world. We have the 
best wheat, barley, oats, canola, flax, soybean, lentils, and 
whatever else we can grow. The problem is getting it to marker. 
Mr. Speaker, in my travels I meet a lot of people and I tell them 
about the importance of agriculture to the Saskatchewan 
economy. In our province, ag is second only to oil. Potash 
comes in about fourth. Saskatchewan has, depending on the 
year and the acres sown, from 44 to 47 per cent of all of 
Canada’s cropland. Ag has been and still is the lifeblood of this 
province. 

My dad always said, they can print more money but they can’t 
make more dirt. Mr. Speaker, most people don’t realize the 
impact and the scale of agriculture. The number of jobs in 
agriculture is impressive, but even bigger is the footprint of ag 
in our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this week the member from Regina Rosemont 
blamed the railway, and rightly so. He also said it was costing 
jobs. Yes, Mr. Speaker, it is costing jobs, but the cut is much 
deeper than that. How about the family farm? For them it is not 
just a job. It is their life. It is their future. It is their community. 
They have the product and buyers but they can’t get it to 
market. So they take out another loan, and eventually the bank 
tells them, you’re done. And they have to give up, or in some 
cases they’re told. Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the loss of the job. 
It’s the erosion of the rural way of life; it’s the erosion of the 
foundation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to offer some solutions. I do 
understand that the railways also have other products that they 
are delivering to ports, products that are also very important to 
our province’s economy, like potash, oil, natural gas, and the 
list goes on. These products also need to get to market. The 
obvious answer, of course, is pipeline for oil and gas. That 
would free up a lot of railways. Some people say it isn’t safe on 
a pipeline. Ask that question to the people of Quebec, what can 
happen with a trainload of oil. 
 
A lot of opinions are based on emotion, not on facts. Without 
facts you have nothing but emotion and we can’t build our 
province on emotion. The following is the main conclusion 
from the Fraser Institute. They did research on Safety in the 
Transportation of Oil and Gas: Pipelines or Rail? Their 
conclusions were as follows: 
 

Transporting oil and gas by pipeline or rail is . . . 
[generally] quite safe. 
 
But when the safety of transporting oil and gas by 
pipelines and rail is compared, taking into consideration 
the amount of product moved, pipelines are found to be the 
much safer transportation method. 
 
Specifically, rail is found to be over 4.5 times more likely 
to experience an occurrence when compared to pipelines. 
 
Over 70 percent of pipeline occurrences result in spills of 1 
m3 or less, and only 17 percent of pipeline occurrences 
take place in actual line pipe, meaning that the vast 
majority of spills occur in facilities, which may have 
secondary containment mechanisms and procedures. 

 
The next point is rail can only take oil to points in North 
America. Rail would not be feasible to get oil to ports for 
export. It would be too slow and too inefficient. We need 
pipelines. Of all the products we export, only oil and natural gas 
can make the use of pipelines. The conclusion is, put oil and gas 
in pipelines and free up railway space for our grains. 
 
That leaves but one question for the NDP in Saskatchewan: 
who do you support, our neighbour NDP Alberta or federal 
NDP? We need the rail space for grain. Speak now. 
Saskatchewan agriculture is waiting for your reply and looking 



3580 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2018 

for your support. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. This is an 
important debate that we enter into here today. This is an issue 
that should’ve been top of desk, top of priority for the past 
premier who failed to address this issue, and it needs to be top 
of desk for this cabinet, for this Premier. 
 
So I’m glad that the motion’s been brought forward. We’ll 
stand unanimous on the motion. But there’s so much more 
that’s needed to make this rail system that has failed our 
economy, failed producers for far too long, actually perform. 
 
I want to just first quote Todd Lewis, the president of APAS: 
 

Farmers are stuck with more grain in their bins just when 
they need . . . to pay bills and prepare for spring seeding. 
They need a plan to address the backlog and get the 2017 
crop to port. 

 
Todd Lewis, president of APAS. This is the reality that 
producers are facing all across Saskatchewan. Producers who 
have crop in the bin that did their part, did their work, worked 
in adverse weather conditions as well to do so, and now it’s 
time that our rail system perform and allow them to get that 
crop to market. 
 
It’s the same reality that, in fact, many across our economy are 
facing — our manufacturers, our exporters across our province. 
It should be a concern to all in this Assembly that the refinery 
hasn’t been running at full capacity, meaning job loss, Mr. 
Speaker, because of the fact that the refinery can’t get its 
refined oil product onto the rails and to market as well. 
 
It should be a concern that this is a reality for all manufacturers 
across Saskatchewan. It should be a concern how this impacts 
the Evraz steel mill right here in Regina, Mr. Speaker. So this is 
critical to our economy. 
 
I was chatting recently with potash producers within the 
province, and they’re impacted in a big way by this. The fact is, 
we have a lot of knowledge in this province through producer 
groups, farm groups, Mr. Speaker, through our potash 
producers, through Canpotex who know rail transportation like 
few others, Mr. Speaker. We have folks like Federated Co-op 
and the refinery, all of our manufacturers within this province, 
world-class agricultural equipment manufacturers who have so 
much skin in this game, Mr. Speaker, and who are directly 
impacted when they can’t get their fine products to the world. 
We should be bringing all of those groups together, and that 
should be led by this Premier and by this government to find 
solutions. 
 
The weak measures or the measures brought forward here today 
by the government simply are just, you know, are simply 
insufficient to make this underperforming rail system actually 
perform. The fact is we have a duopoly that doesn’t focus on 
the interests of Saskatchewan producers or Saskatchewan 
businesses or the Saskatchewan economy, and it’s failed us for 
far too long. And it’s, you know, past time that this government 
. . . In fact the Sask Party has treated those rail companies with 

kid gloves every step of the way at a time where we need to be 
tough and we need to be strong for the people of our province. 
 
We certainly support C-49 being passed. This is an 
improvement and this is important. We need to support 
interswitching as well. And critical to that, as I hear from many 
producer groups, is that we need to make sure when those 
measures are brought forward that there’s actual enforcement 
then. So we need to support and be pushing the federal 
government as well, to ensure enforcement within the CTA 
[Canada Transportation Act] to make sure that when that’s 
passed, that interswitching is actually enforced as well. 
 
We certainly need to realize as well that this is a time for us to 
push further. And the fact that joint running rights aren’t 
something that the Sask Party’s willing to advocate is 
disappointing. There’s no reason that we shouldn’t be able to 
push for actual competition on our rail system, a system that has 
full control for those rail companies but that far too often fails 
producers within our province. 
 
[11:30] 
 
And of course, the costs are borne by the people of our province 
— billions of dollars of economic activity, jobs, thousands of 
jobs impacted all across our province. And producers who are 
left in the lurch and who are left with bills that are mounting as 
vessels sit in port on the coast of BC while awaiting the grain to 
arrive on train, Mr. Speaker. And that demurrage of course isn’t 
paid by the rail companies. It isn’t paid by the grain companies. 
It’s paid by hard-working and world-class producers across our 
province, and it’s not right. So we need to push as well for some 
penalties and reciprocity for producers. 
 
This is a government that hasn’t been helpful. This is a 
government that heard, as the discussion occurred around the 
elimination of the Wheat Board, from both sides of that debate, 
Mr. Speaker, that there was going to be a concern around 
transportation, the logistics, the organization of transportation. 
And what this government failed to do was to step up and work 
with producers to ensure that we had some logistics in place, 
some organization to the transportation that served producers, 
that ensured some clout for producers here in the province. 
 
Further, they’ve of course recently cut grants to shortlines 
across Saskatchewan who are certainly critical to grain 
movement and rail performance within our province. They sold 
off of course the Grain Car Corporation, which was one lever 
within this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I say, we need to be pushing for joint running rights to 
be part of this discussion in a way that actually gets some 
performance and some competition from those companies. And 
I’m getting heckled from the Minister of Agriculture here, Mr. 
Speaker. What I’d ask him to do is to roll up his sleeves. You 
know, the tough talk is one thing, but to roll up his sleeves and 
get the job done for producers and not be afraid to push those 
rail companies and to push Ottawa to do something meaningful 
around interswitching and joint running rights, and then make 
sure that it’s actually enforced as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve got a lot of answers in this province. We’ve got producer 
groups and businesses across this province, across industries, 



March 22, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3581 

who are ready to be a part of this discussion. And the fact that 
we’re failing to get our product to market at a time within a 
sluggish economy should be a concern to all.  
 
So yes, we need to make sure we improve all transportation. 
Yes, we need pipelines. Yes, we need pipelines to get our 
product to tidewater, Mr. Speaker. This is important from a 
fiscal perspective. It’s important from an economic perspective. 
It’s important to make sure they’re well regulated and well 
managed. But it should be a concern to this government that 
they’re failing to get the job done with our rail system at a time 
where our economy is weak. Because what we should all aim 
for, Mr. Speaker, is to expand new markets, to ensure new trade 
opportunities, and we should work and hope for our economy to 
be back into full stride at some point here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the fact of the matter is, our underperforming rail system 
isn’t up to the task. And if this Premier wanted to do something 
that the past premier just couldn’t get done, Mr. Speaker, he’d 
address this issue. And at a time where our economy is far too 
sluggish, it provides a bit of an opportunity for this Premier to 
lean into this issue of transportation, this issue of rail, to address 
this for future generations, Mr. Speaker, so that as we advance 
new markets around the world, as we advance the cause of our 
exporters, as we prepare for stronger economic cycles across 
our commodities, that we can ensure that when that happens, 
Mr. Speaker, that we don’t have a backlog that chokes off that 
activity. 
 
Because we’ve got world-class producers in this province, but 
it’s no good if they can’t get their product from bin to market, 
Mr. Speaker. We’ve got world-class resources in this province, 
but if they fail to deliver that product in a timely way to the 
world, to our global customers, then they’re put in a position 
that’s compromising them from their bottom line. It impacts 
jobs and it impacts their future. So this is a critical time for 
more than lip service from backbenchers in this debate, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s time for a Premier to actually roll up the sleeves, 
for an Agriculture minister to do more than heckle in a debate 
here with backbenchers that are in that debate, but to work to 
make the system perform for the people of our province. 
 
Right now we’ve got vessels that are sitting out there in English 
Bay and off the Port of Prince Rupert, and those vessels that are 
sitting there waiting for grain shipments are costly, Mr. 
Speaker. And again those costs aren’t borne by the rail 
companies or by the grain companies or the handlers. They’re 
borne by hard-working Saskatchewan producers, Mr. Speaker. 
So it’s past time that we get the job done and make this rail 
system actually perform for people today, for producers across 
Saskatchewan, for the future of our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to join in this very important debate. I get to talk about a lot of 
my favourite things: the railroads, the Senate, the Liberals, 
Justin Trudeau, and the NDP, and possibly even the CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation]. 
 
But this is a important debate. As we move . . . To move 
forward, I listened to the member, I listened to both the 
members. I’m going to address a little bit on what they’ve said. 

The one member that just spoke, the member from Regina 
Rosemont, you know this is a federal initiative. We could try to 
pass a bill in the House. It’d be thrown out of court in about 10 
seconds, you know. Railroads are under the federal 
transportation Act. I know our Ag minister and our Premier and 
our past premier have spent a lot of time on this file. They spent 
a lot of time in Ottawa on this file, on this file with prime 
ministers, with the federal ag transportation minister, with the 
federal Ag minister. 
 
You know, I don’t want to beat up too much on the railroads, 
Mr. Speaker. I mean they move the commodity. But they have 
responsibility, and I’ll briefly touch on why they have 
responsibility. They were given a monopoly by our forefathers, 
because our forefathers that set this country up knew that for a 
country to survive and to grow and prosper, you have to get 
your product to market. So to do that, they knew they had to 
build a railroad right across Canada. So they gave the railroads 
a monopoly. With that, they gave them huge tracts of land. But 
with that understanding was that they would move the product 
to port as fast as they could, I mean, and naturally with a profit. 
That’s totally understandable. But that should be their main 
priority. 
 
And every now and again, it seems like every four years or five, 
they kind of forget that a bit. They forget that and they have to 
be reminded. Well we might be past the point of just reminding 
them of that. There is things that we have to . . . the federal 
government has to do to improve that. 
 
You know, I was in Missouri in January talking to farmers 
down there. And you know what an old farmer told me? He 
said, “Do you know why here in Missouri we consider Jesse 
James a hero? Because he robbed trains.” You know, that 
means there’s transportation problems right across North 
America as we move forward, you know, and it has to be 
addressed. 
 
And I don’t think the feds are doing a good enough job on it. 
They put a bill in the Senate that has sat there for three . . . for 
months. And what did they do with that bill? It was omnibus 
bill, dealt with other transportation issues. The Senate asked 
them to peel off the railroad end of it. The House of Commons 
wouldn’t. But the Senate could have also amended that bill, sent 
it back, just that portion. They didn’t. I believe, from what I 
understand, it’s still on the order paper in committee on the 
Senate. 
 
So that’s how much the Justin Trudeau Liberals think of 
Western Canada. They do not seem to want to push this issue at 
all. And I know that we’ve worked very hard to know that there 
has to be changes in the rail, whether it’s actually moving some 
of the product through the United States, is through putting it on 
the interswitching, different things instead of just putting 
another fine on them. 
 
I think we have to look at the ships that are sitting in 
Vancouver. Instead of the farmers paying for that, maybe the 
railroads should start paying demurrage charges for that. Those 
are things that we’ve talked about with our federal, but that has 
to come from the federal government. You know, we can push 
them ideas to them, which we have. 
 



3582 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2018 

You know, the member from Regina who spoke two times ago, 
Regina Lakeview, talked about how she could help. Well I’ll 
make a suggestion. I’ll make a suggestion. You know, you 
offered to write a letter. Okay, did you write a letter to the BC 
premier? To the BC premier? A respectable letter. I’m not 
asking to get over the board, but saying, you know, explaining 
how not pushing that pipeline or stopping that pipeline, a 
pipeline that was approved environmentally by the federal 
government, by Environment, has passed all the regulations. 
Have you asked, why are you holding that up? 
 
Not only, it’s hurting our oil producers in Saskatchewan, it’s 
hurting the steelworkers in Saskatchewan, but majorly it’s 
hurting our grain producers of Saskatchewan. I will ask . . . And 
you said you would write a letter. I will call on you now to 
write that letter, your opposition. We’ve tried to talk to him. It’s 
like talking to a wall. I’m hoping you can make that argument 
on behalf of the grain farmers, for the oil producers, for the steel 
producers, of this. Because if we can at least get oil moving 
more by pipeline, we will be able to move grain more by rail. 
Those are things we also have to look at as we move forward. 
 
I mean, the railroad companies, there’s a lot of commodities 
being moved by them. One of the issues with rail companies — 
and I’ve dealt with them and had meetings with them over the 
years — when this happens, they seem to pick it up and they’re 
always late, but then they always seem to forget the winter. 
They have executives in Toronto that seem to forget that winter 
comes every year. 
 
You know, they don’t want to consult much. They don’t want to 
work with each other even, the CP, CN; and the shortlines, they 
don’t want to work with. I’ve been through rail abandonments. 
The first thing they want to do, the rail company, is to do a 
salvage. And usually then it takes some public meetings, public 
pressure, some letters, and they will then change and sell it to a 
shortline. Selling to a shortline, working with a shortline, 
should be their first option, not their last. 
 
The grain companies, a lot of the old elevators, they sit on 
CNCP property. They lease it from them. They lease it. I’ve had 
producers buy the elevator and then not be able to make a deal 
with CN, not being . . . They won’t sell them that quarter of an 
acre, trying to hold it up. They should be trying to work with 
producers. 
 
And I think . . . well I know that there has to be some changes 
made but it has to come on the federal end. That’s why we’re 
up discussing it. That’s why they’re being made aware of this, 
what’s happening today with this speech, you know. And we’ll 
keep working on it. And I’m glad that you agree with it, that we 
need your support. But we also need the support of your party 
to move oil too. We need that greatly. That is part of this whole 
problem because there’s more commodities being moved by 
rail. 
 
This is a growing province. Our crops, we talk about a bumper 
crop this year and a few years ago. That’s going to be normal. 
You know, the way farmers are producing crops nowadays and 
the ingenuity that they have, the equipment they have, farming 
acre to acre, this is going to be normal, these kind of crops. 
We’re hoping our oil is going to keep growing in this province, 
our steel industry, all our manufacturing. 

We are a landlocked province. We are a landlocked province. 
We need transportation out of here. We either need 
transportation east, we need it west, we need it to the south 
even. And there seems to be a reluctance with CN and CP to 
look at moving grain through the United States. And those are 
things that I think they have to look at as we move forward. 
 
I believe that the Prime Minister and the federal Liberals have 
did an awful job on this file. They, as usual, forget about 
Western Canada. The Prime Minister will offer some lip service 
as usual, but he has the power, and his transportation minister, 
to make changes to the transportation Act. And I believe that 
has to come because our farmers are the ones that are suffering, 
as the speeches that have been made today. They’re the ones 
that are paying the demurrage charges. They are the ones that 
are sitting with their crop in the bins not able to move. And the 
federal Liberals, which the transportation Act of the railroads is 
under that, has to look at this rather than just trying to adjust 
maybe different fines at that end of it. So to myself, this is a 
great motion and I’m glad everybody in the House is supporting 
it. 
 
[11:45] 
 
The Speaker: — Nobody else? I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wasn’t 
quite on top of this for the first few seconds here, but I am ready 
to roll and happy to be involved in this debate. And it’s one of 
those weird moments in the legislature where I find myself in 
agreement with much of what has been said on both sides here 
today, Mr. Speaker. I mean, maybe we are ushering in a new era 
of mutual understandings and common agreements. 
 
And certainly when it comes to our grain farmers here in 
Saskatchewan, we are 100 per cent onside in making sure that 
that grain gets moved in a timely fashion, that farmers aren’t 
being put on the hook for demurrage charges. We don’t want to 
see this gap in the basis of the price like we did last time back in 
2014. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is in some ways a bit of a déjà vu feeling 
as well. You’ll recall these debates happening back in 2014 
when the railways failed Western Canadian grain farmers 
horribly. And as the member from Carrot River said, to the tune 
of over $6 billion went out of farmers’ pockets because of the 
failure of the privately owned railways to not handle the volume 
that needed to be handled. 
 
We know that the goal is always to have as large a crop as 
possible, and if the railway system cannot handle the crops that 
our producers are growing, then we need to see much more 
pressure put on those private companies. And not so that their 
shareholders make more money, Mr. Speaker, because you’ve 
got to remember what the priority of CP and CN is, and that is 
to enrich their shareholders. That’s their only goal. And if that 
goal means cutting locomotives, cutting staff, cutting cars, and 
not dealing with Canadian winters, which by the way have been 
around for quite a while, Mr. Speaker. The winters have been 
here since the railways came in, and that’s a long time ago. So 
maybe even winter existed before the railways came along, you 
know. I know the member from Carrot River is seeming to hope 



March 22, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3583 

that we’ll get rid of winters through climate change, but I’m not 
sure that that’s always a good thing, Mr. Speaker, and would 
love to debate him on that issue as well sometime. 
 
Because it’s déjà vu all over again. We had a bill that went 
through the House back when the crisis happened a few years 
ago. Now we have a Liberal government and again I can’t be in 
more agreement with these guys this time around. They weren’t 
so hard on the Harper government last time, or Gerry Ritz. They 
weren’t too hard on Gerry Ritz last time, but at least now 
they’re standing up to Marc Garneau, the minister responsible 
for transportation federally. And of course, Mr. MacAulay who 
was here yesterday for the installation of the new Lieutenant 
Governor. 
 
So we need to know that this government is not just paying lip 
service to this, is not just calling people up and having 
conversations. We need to have this government stomping its 
feet and being as mad as heck about this, Mr. Speaker. Because 
last time — and the Minister of Agriculture will recall — all 
those polite phone calls and public statements about concerns 
didn’t get us all too far, Mr. Speaker. We got those temporary 
orders issued but the changes that we need to the grain 
transportation system in this province simply have not been 
made. 
 
So here we have a bill that came forward I believe maybe a year 
or so ago — I have some information on it here that I’d like to 
get on the record — but of course, this is Bill C-49, of course 
it’s sitting in Senate right now, Mr. Speaker. And we had 
Senator Tkachuk back in December saying, “It’s not our fault 
it’s taking so long.” Well I don’t care whose fault it is that it’s 
taking so long. Governments have to do better. The Senate has 
to do better. Because when you’re taking money out of farmer’s 
pockets, that hurts the people of Saskatchewan. And we have to 
get really angry about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also know that this isn’t just impacting, of course, our grain 
producers. It’s also impacting our mining sector. It’s impacting 
our potash sector, our other mining sector. It’s impacting our 
refineries here in Saskatchewan. We have a wonderful facility 
here in Regina that is our own value-add for the petroleum 
industry and they had to shut down, Mr. Speaker, because they 
couldn’t transport their product. What is going on? This is 
completely unacceptable. 
 
And so I think we need to do more than just write letters, 
although letters are a good start and I’m proud of my colleague 
from Regina Lakeview, the critic for Agriculture, who’s 
suggesting at least we’re doing that much. But I remember 
when my dad, if he was still alive, would tell you about when 
they marched on Ottawa. When farmers actually marched on 
Ottawa and he was bound and determined to talk to Mr. 
Diefenbaker, the prime minister at the time. He came from 
Saskatchewan and wanted to argue with him about what was 
happening with grain transportation, and unfortunately he was 
mad till the day he died that he never, that Diefenbaker just 
pushed him off. And he still was angry about that, you know, 70 
years later, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you know, the thing is is that we also have lost a bit of our 
orderly marketing. And when we had the Canadian Wheat 
Board, we had at least two commodities, which was wheat and 

barley, that were being marketed orderly. And I don’t know that 
we’ve talked enough about the loss of orderly marketing in 
terms of what the impact was having. We have two crises now 
since the disappearance of that marketing board and if a person 
was really honest about it, they’d have to look at it and see, 
does that have an impact? 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, when you have one board looking 
after a commodity, they can pick and choose when the grain’s 
going to be paid. The farmers were getting advanced payments 
on their wheat so they didn’t have to deliver it to the elevator. 
And the advanced payment itself kept a lot of farmers afloat. 
And I know the member from Arm River talked about farmers 
in dire financial straits. We’ve got farmers that are on the verge, 
Mr. Speaker. They can’t buy their inputs for this year, they 
can’t buy their seed, their fertilizer. And they aren’t able to 
access the deferred payments that they used to be able to get 
when there was orderly marketing of wheat, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now there’s all kinds of arguments . . . And this is maybe 
where I don’t agree with the members opposite, but I think that 
the disappearance of the . . . I think farmers were in favour of 
the Wheat Board last time they had a free vote, Mr. Speaker. 
But you know, the federal government didn’t bother checking 
in. The federal government took away the right for farmers to 
be self-determining. And the member knows that. The farmers 
were not given the right to make that decision. It was taken 
away from them by the federal government of the day; of 
course the Harper one. 
 
Well I’m glad we got, we did find . . . We did find an area of 
disagreement, Mr. Speaker. But I would like to see some logical 
analysis being done on the impact of the loss of the orderly 
marketing of wheat and barley. As you know, that orderly 
marketing allowed farmers to access deferred payments without 
having to go to the elevator and deliver that wheat. They were 
able to time the sale of their wheat. Having the board allowed 
for us to take our top, world-class wheat and market it to other 
areas that were . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I think the 
member from Cannington said there has never been a bumper 
crop till the Sask Party came into power. I don’t know about 
that, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know about that. I think there’s a few 
farmers in this province that might disagree with that notion, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because we know farmers have been working hard in this 
province for the last 100 years. Farmers did not start working 
hard when the Sask Party got elected, Mr. Speaker. Farmers 
have been innovative and have been creating new ways to farm 
since the day the first ox broke soil on this province. So for the 
Sask Party to think that they’re God’s answer to farming, it’s 
something that I think they need to take a look at because it’s 
not true. It’s not true. 
 
Farmers are doing the work themselves and they have lots to be 
proud of. But they need a government that’s going to support 
them and go to Ottawa and kick some butt, Mr. Speaker. They 
don’t need these guys being political. We need their support 
more than ever. And the Sask Party needs to go forward and 
stand up for farmers and tell Ottawa to get the job done and get 
those railways delivering our farmers’ grain. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I support this motion. I think it’s a fabulous 



3584 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2018 

motion, and I’m very glad to have had the opportunity to be in 
the debate today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The 65 minutes of debate has expired. We 
now have 10 minutes of questions. I recognize the member for 
Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we know, this 
government’s been in power for more than a decade. We just 
heard 65 minutes of members largely on that side pointing 
fingers and blaming everyone but themselves for the mess we 
currently find ourselves in. So my question is this, to the 
member from Batoche: what role does this government have to 
play in ensuring the timely and predictable movement of 
commodities and why have they failed so miserably to this 
point? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Failed miserably? Our 
government has worked harder than any government previous. 
When you look at the record of what you guys did with the 
Wheat Board, our government is contact . . . working with the 
federal government. The move has to be made by the federal 
government and we are working on them hard — something 
your party never did. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The backlog is a 
significant issue for our local farmers. It has the potential to 
cost the Western Canadian agricultural sector millions of 
dollars. But you know what else would cost our farmers 
millions of dollars? An NDP carbon tax. And that’s not the only 
way the members opposite will cost our farmers. The Leader of 
the Opposition has also promised to increase corporate tax in 
his leadership platform. Well many of the farmers who are 
having trouble getting their products to the market, and who 
would be hit hardest by an NDP carbon tax, are also 
incorporated. Where does it end, Mr. Speaker? 
 
My question is to the member from Nutana. How can you say 
you’re helping farmers with one hand when your party plans to 
use the other to hurt our farmers in a significant tax increase? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker, I’m not entirely sure I 
heard the question, but what I can say is that we need to see a 
strong . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the question was 
convoluted and then that’s the problem with it. I thought we 
were talking about grain transportation, and that’s the motion 
that’s on the table today. So maybe more political 
gamesmanship from the backbencher over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, of course we need to take . . . This is a serious issue. It’s not 
a time to be coy about politics, Mr. Speaker. We need to make 
sure our producers are protected. Our producers need to be 
protected. They need to ensure that their political leaders are on 
top of this. Now we have the minister from . . . Actually, I’m 
going to save that for a question myself, Mr. Speaker. But we 
need to work harder at protecting our producers. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this grain backlog is 
costing producers billions of dollars. It’s costing our economy 
and all manufacturers and exporters billions of other dollars, 
and it’s costing us jobs. My question is to the member from 
Carrot River. These measures are important, but they’re 
insufficient. Is he willing to champion joint running rights as 
part of this discussion to actually push for a rail system that’ll 
perform and get some competition on the rail? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you for the question to the member 
from Rosemont. Mr. Speaker, I think what they should do is 
read Bill C-49 to begin with, with what we really want to do. 
But going even further than that, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that 
they talk to their federal leader, to their federal leader who is so 
against pipelines, to be able to put oil in pipelines so we can 
move oil in pipelines and we can move grain down the rail 
where it should be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what they have to do is they have to go back and 
tell their federal cousins to stand up for us in Western Canada 
and start moving that oil and the natural gas down the pipeline 
so we can use those trains for moving the grain that we have to. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We can all agree that 
a significant reason for backlogs in grain shipping is that we in 
Western Canada, specifically in Saskatchewan, have an 
abundance of resources to get to market as we feed the world 
and provide the natural resources and build the economies of 
our 150-plus nation customers around the world. 
 
One of the prime commodities competing for rail space is oil. 
Pipeline projects have faced significant opposition by the 
federal NDP, the BC provincial NDP, and by members opposite 
who support the Leap Manifesto and oppose the industry. In 
addition, the new NDP leader repeatedly stands in support of a 
carbon tax on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
My question is for the member from Saskatoon Nutana. Given 
that the mother ship, the federal NDP, oppose the Kinder 
Morgan pipeline, where exactly do you stand as a caucus on 
supporting Kinder Morgan to the West Coast, which would by 
extension support our agricultural community? Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[12:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And obviously the 
member opposite wasn’t listening the last time we had a debate 
about it, when I agreed fully with the notion that Kinder 
Morgan needs to go forward. And we need to focus on the 
federal government to make sure that that pipeline goes 



March 22, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3585 

through. I don’t know what you’re not listening to, but that’s 
been clear from day one. And if you want to do revisionist 
history, that’s entirely up to you, but you should be paying 
attention better. 
 
The Speaker: — I continue to recognize the member from 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Hard to bounce up and down, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to ask a question to the member from Batoche because just 
recently the Sask Agriculture minister told media that it was 
“late in the game” for this season to mandate rail deliveries. 
But, Mr. Speaker, this issue isn’t new. Can you tell me why 
your minister didn’t take the issue seriously and stay on top of 
it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When you say our 
minister didn’t take it seriously, our minister is part of 
agriculture. He’s worked the land. He understands it. He knows 
it. And he’s been having meetings with the federal . . . I’ve got 
pages here of how many times he met with the ministers and 
working federally. So the answer is, the feds are where the 
problem is. We’ve been doing our part. We’ve been doing our 
part. We’re asking for your support so that we can get the grain 
moving the correct way, in railway cars. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
interesting to listen to what the member from Lakeview said 
really wasn’t a debate but has become a debate. I have listened 
to the three members from the opposition who have all agreed 
with the position that our government has taken, that we need to 
do more work on the grain transportation. It’s the first time in 
10 years that I can remember the opposition being on the right 
side of an ag issue in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we certainly heard it. We heard it from the member from 
Nutana that wanted to relive the Wheat Board debate. We’ll 
have that one any day of the week, Mr. Speaker, and so will all 
of rural Saskatchewan, when I look across and see the members 
from rural Saskatchewan on that side. 
 
We also know where they stand on pipelines, Mr. Speaker — 
on the wrong side of the issue on pipelines. She did mention a 
little bit about innovation in agriculture. Where do they stand on 
GMOs [genetically modified organism], Mr. Speaker? That’s 
been an innovation in agriculture. They’re on the wrong side of 
that. They’ve been on the wrong side of every issue in 
agriculture in this province, and it’s reflected by the number of 
seats that they hold. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is now against 
spraying our crops in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. My question 
to the member from Regina Rosemont, who ran against that 
very leader: is he too in agreement with, we should quit 
spraying our crops here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? As well 
as the carbon tax. He’s against the carbon tax. Does he stand 
with his leader on those two points? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we stand with the 
producers of this province and their practices, their modern 
practices. And you know, that was a minister. He was once the 
Deputy Premier, and he sat in that desk. He was part of a 
cabinet when we had the last backlog under this government, 
Mr. Speaker, and didn’t get the job done. 
 
And now we see him intervening in the end of a 75-minute 
debate on an issue that should be top of desk for the current 
Premier, making light of an issue, playing political games, Mr. 
Speaker, at the expense of producers across our province, at the 
expense of those that work at the refinery, at the expense of the 
very bottom line for this provincial government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question back to that member, and I hope he takes his feet 
again: does he support actually rolling up his sleeves, 
supporting joint running rights and other measures that will 
make our rail system actually perform? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for . . . Where are 
you? Saskatoon Fairview. Last one. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here’s my question: 
does the member from Batoche agree that scrapping the 
Canadian Wheat Board created a huge gap in logistical and 
capacity planning, and that the decision to end the Canadian 
Wheat Board without an alternative has proven disastrous? 
 
The Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 606 — The Election (Fairness and Accountability) 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise this morning and enter into debate on Bill No. 
606, An Act to amend The Election Act, 1996 to provide 
fairness and accountability in election fundraising. And the 
short title is The Election (Fairness and Accountability) 
Amendment Act, 2017. So, Mr. Speaker, I will be making the 
appropriate motions to the effect that this is . . . at the end of my 
comments. But I do want to make some introductory comments 
to set the stage for this. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if some of what I say sounds a little 
familiar, it is because it is familiar, familiar in so many ways. In 
so many ways we are yet having this debate that should not be. 
We should have passed this bill when it was 602 the last time. 
We are the last province to get on board with fairness and 
accountability in our elections. 
 
We see two major issues, news stories that came up in the past 
year. Last time I rose and spoke on this was April 13th, 2017, 
not quite a year ago, just shy, 11 months. But essentially the 
same facts are in place. In fact they’re highlighted even more, 
so I’ll be making references to that speech then, because people 



3586 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2018 

say the same thing. We are the wild west. We are the wild west 
and we’re the last of the provinces really to have this kind of 
outdated legislation that people have come to realize is totally 
inappropriate, you know. And as I say almost on a daily basis 
when I raise the petition on behalf of people of Saskatchewan 
. . . And for some reason this gets people over there very, very 
upset, and this is one that hits them in particularly sensitive 
spots. I don’t know why. I don’t know why they are so sensitive 
to changing the law. 
 
We see that BC now has moved their legislation, and in fact 
they have a task force, I understand. We watch carefully. But I 
will be talking briefly about that in my comments, because 
clearly we were touted as the last two, the last two provinces to 
have such outdated election transparency and fundraising 
legislation. And now we are alone in Canada — alone in 
Canada — to have this kind of outdated legislation that clearly 
allows for questions to be asked. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if you follow . . . 
Postmedia just released a news story this week, a website that 
talks about, follow the money. Now it’s hard to follow the 
money in Saskatchewan, but not . . . You know, we have some 
very good journalists who have done some digging. And I’ll be 
talking about some of the facts that have become apparent, 
particularly in the Sask Party leadership race, that causes one to 
really wonder what’s going on in Saskatchewan politics. 
 
Follow the money. Now that seems to be a common phrase we 
hear when things aren’t great, when they’re not on the up and 
up. And you wonder what’s going on. Why are people making 
such decisions? And we saw that and I talked about this last 
spring, where we saw some $38 million in tax cuts to the 
wealthy, and we know that even increased when we saw the 
changes in the tax regime in the fall. But last spring’s budget 
where we saw tax cuts to the wealthy, but to the working poor 
we saw in fact tax increases: PST increases to children’s 
clothing, the cut to the STC, all these kind of changes. 
 
And you wonder, so why is it? What causes this government to 
make these kind of decisions? Are they really working in the 
favour of Saskatchewan people or is it some other reason? 
 
Now if we had stronger legislation, that answer could be given 
very much more clearly. But now with all the questions about, 
where does the money come from . . . And I’ll go into some of 
the details that some of the journalists . . . And I know some of 
the members, particularly the member from Saskatoon 
Northwest who did run for the leadership race, and I think his 
name came up in terms of fundraising, and I’ll be sure to 
include what was said in the media about him because he’s very 
interested in that. 
 
So over the course of time that I have, I’ll be reviewing our 
legislation. It’s the same that we had before, talking about the 
fact, and I’ll just review quickly the preamble, that our laws 
currently allow. . . And this is for the people at home wondering 
what Bill 606 is about: 
 

. . . currently allow for unlimited contributions from 
corporations and unions; 
 
AND WHEREAS Saskatchewan’s election financing laws 

currently allow for unlimited contributions from 
out-of-province donors [and that was highlighted in spades 
in their leadership race]; 
 
AND WHEREAS the federal government and the 
governments of Alberta, Manitoba, Québec, and Nova 
Scotia [and I have to say, now British Columbia] have 
already banned corporate and union donations to political 
parties; 
 

You know, but, Mr. Speaker, I write in the bill: 
 

AND WHEREAS Saskatchewan people deserve a 
democratic system that is free from the influence of 
corporate, union, and out-of-province donations. 

 
So we talk about this, and we talk of the contributions and who 
can donate and who can’t donate and it’s pretty well 
straightforward. It talks about, in one calendar year an 
individual’s total combined contributions to candidates, 
political parties, constituency associations cannot exceed 
$1,275. 
 
So it’s a reasonable bill and it’s one that I think we should all be 
able to get behind, but for some reason this government has 
decided to stonewall on this and not go there. And I just want to 
thank the leadership on this side, particularly the member for 
Regina Rosemont who brought this bill forward previously in 
Bill 602, and his leadership around this legislation. I just want 
to thank him and give him a shout-out for that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said that in BC last fall, they introduced 
Bill M 201, Get Big Money Out of Politics Act, 2017. They ran 
on that and it was their first priority and this is the kind of thing 
that they are going to do for sure. 
 
So they’re banning organizations to make contributions. And 
what’s interesting and I think this is something that we could 
even . . . And we would take as a friendly amendment if we got 
to committee, because they are very much more explicit about 
who is an organization. We talked about this: a corporation, 
company, business, or partnership, unincorporated 
organizations, trade unions, employers’ organizations, 
community or interest group, non-profit organizations, 
charitable organizations, society, unregistered political parties, 
unregistered constituency associations, law firms, partnerships, 
corporations, and business, trade, industry, professional 
associations. So they’re pretty clear about what they want to do 
and they limit their donations to $1,200, not 1,275 like we have. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, that would be something to take a look at, 
at what BC’s doing, but we are left alone. We are left alone in 
this pretty indefensible position that we have where we have a 
situation where we’re the last in the country with such 
backward, wild-west legislation. 
 
Now what I did say, I wanted to highlight . . . So that was one 
news story that changed since last spring and what was the 
other one, of course, was the big money that happened in Sask 
Party leadership race. And I just want to highlight some of the 
news stories that came out about that. And this is a very 
informative, enlightening article written by D.C. Fraser of the 
Regina Leader-Post, published on November 24th, 2017. The 



March 22, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3587 

title of the report is, “Meet the donors: who is shelling out the 
big bucks in the Sask Party leadership race?” 
 
Now just keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, this isn’t based on the 
final reporting out of the financial statements, but it is one that 
was mid-term. There was one later on in January 16th where 
it’s a little bit more updated, where Cheveldayoff — and I’m 
reading the title — “Cheveldayoff fundraises the most in a race 
to replace Wall.” But very interesting insight into the inner 
workings of where these folks go to get their support, and it’s 
very, very telling because it’s not a wide base of, a groundswell 
of people across Saskatchewan. In fact it very much seems to be 
the opposite, the opposite, in fact. Well we could comment on 
the leadership and the stats and that, but today we talk about the 
money. 
 
[12:15] 
 
He writes, “A small group of individuals and associated 
companies are responsible for one-quarter of the money donated 
so far in the race to decide Saskatchewan’s next premier.” 
 
And the quote, “Twenty-five per cent of that money — or $141, 
625 — is just coming from a handful of people and companies.” 
 
That doesn’t sound so democratic to me, Mr. Speaker. I have to 
say that in fact it’s much better if it’s a larger group of people 
giving small amounts, but in this case that’s not the situation. 
 
And he talks about one example of, and this is a quote: 
“Thirteen of the 29 corporations listed as donors to Alanna 
Koch’s campaign are companies with which Paul Hill or the 
Hill Group of Companies are affiliated.” And they gave a total 
of $21,625, or 43 per cent of the $50,500 that she had raised 
from businesses. 

 
And so it goes on and her campaign manager spokesperson 
said, and I quote: 
 

“As you know, he runs many companies and invests in a 
lot of things and it’s basically his prerogative to donate to 
whoever he wants to, and his donations fall within the 
rules of the leadership race and we’ve been quite 
transparent . . . we’ve disclosed all our donors,” said 
Gallagher. “It’s just a donation from Mr. Hill.” 

 
Well what a donation, what a sizable donation. And the largest 
donation to her campaign came from a company owned by 
Trevor Boquist, a Regina businessman. And “one of his 
companies donated $10,000 to Koch’s campaign,” Fraser 
writes. So between them they’re responsible for 27 per cent of 
the money raised by their team. 
 
In terms of the Premier’s donor list, he lists 27 companies 
contributing between $250 and 5,000 but the largest sum came 
from a single individual, Kelly Panteluk, who “. . . owns one of 
Saskatchewan’s largest privately owned heavy equipment 
companies, Kelly Panteluk Construction Ltd (KPCL).” 
 
And I’m quoting here: 
 

According to the company’s website, it’s involved in a 
number of government-funded projects . . . [including] the 

Trans-Canada twinning project [between] . . . 
Broadview-Whitewood area from 2003-2006, the recent 
Highway 39 twinning project and work around the Global 
Transportation Hub. 
 
[He] . . . is listed with his wife as giving $25,000 to [the 
Premier’s] . . . campaign. 

 
And so at the time the Premier had raised $128,000, almost 
$129,000, so that single donation was almost 20 per cent 
coming from one couple. 
 
Interestingly, the Premier’s campaign manager is Jason Wall 
who served as chief of staff to the Minister of Highways. 
 
And he said, and I quote, “That one is significant in size, but we 
appreciate . . .” This is what the Premier said: “That one is 
significant in size, but we appreciate all of the donations.” And 
he understood that the construction company “did some work 
for the province and highways” . . . Well there you go. 
 
So anyways, the other one that was very interesting was the one 
that was raised by the member of Saskatoon Silverwood, who 
raised the most money overall, with 30 per cent of his $165,000 
in donations coming from five companies that donated $10,000 
each to his campaign. Now interestingly, between November 
and January the member was able to raise significantly more 
money, in fact more money than was allowable. They had a cap 
of $250,000. He had raised $265,000 and I understand that 
other extra money had to go to the party. 
 
But here is where he was getting some of his money: 
 

These companies include [and I’m quoting] the 
Millennium III Capital Corporation, which is affiliated 
with a Saskatoon-based commercial real estate investment 
firm. An Ontario-based lawyer [I’ll repeat that, an 
Ontario-based lawyer] also gave Cheveldayoff $10,000 
through a numbered company. A Calgary-based 
investment and real estate company owns Kalmacoff 
Holdings, another $10,000 donor to Cheveldayoff. 

 
And then it goes on to Dutchak Holdings gave $10,000. 
Thunder Ridge gave $10,000. 
 
So interesting in terms of where some of these donations were 
coming from, sizable donations. And here is the one that I know 
some of the folks were interested in, is the Redhead Equipment 
that gave money to the member from Saskatoon Northwest. 
And that company gave $20,000, which is double the amount of 
the next . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. Well it was nice. 
And you know, I want to say this: all these companies, I’m sure, 
are on the up and up. That’s not the issue. 
 
The issue is fairness and transparency and that we should 
actually be trying to make sure it’s a level playing field. 
Because there’s just too many questions get asked, and we can’t 
answer those questions in a way that makes sense to people. 
That when you say a handful of people gave donations, then 
you have to say . . . 
 
And we look at the last budget where they gave such tax cuts to 
the wealthy and then really hammered the working people, 



3588 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2018 

hammered the working people. You would think . . . And you 
know members over there laugh. It’s not funny when they cut 
STC, when they pay PST now on children’s clothing. And the 
Regina members over there laugh about that . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . You know, no, I heard somebody laugh over 
there. That laughing wasn’t coming from this side, Mr. Speaker. 
Too many questions have to be answered. 
 
So we have this and it’s just a simple thing. Let’s make this, 
The Election Act, work for people so they have a sense of trust. 
This is what people were saying about this. This is what people 
were saying. Now I know over there they get really riled up 
about this, but I quoted many people last year about this. 
 
And the quotes stand before us where we have people like Duff 
Conacher, the founder of Democracy Watch, agree. And I’ll just 
read this. He agrees “with Kinney’s assessment that 
Saskatchewan is the ‘wild west’ when it comes to party 
donations because of its unlimited laws.” He says, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan is one of the worst — if not the worst — in 
Canada for political finance system . . . 
 
Under the current rules, Conacher said there is nothing 
stopping a foreign-owned company based in Canada from 
paying for political influence . . . 

 
There’s nothing stopping that. 
 
We see all across Canada people are waking up and saying, hey 
maybe we should make our laws more transparent, more fair. 
But these guys just don’t want to do that. And why? Why is it? 
And that’s the question that people ask. So why are we the last? 
Why don’t we get ahead of this? We saw what happened to the 
BC Liberals because they didn’t get ahead of this. They lost the 
election and then they were out. So I don’t know. 
 
He goes on to say, “It amounts to the best government money 
can buy instead of the best government that voters want.” And 
is that the case? I have to ask, is that the case. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I go on and I talk about it. It’s a naive 
attempt by this government to defend their coffers and clearly it 
is. They’ll do anything to defend what they have. And this is 
just not appropriate for this Chamber. This is not why people 
elect us. This is why people don’t trust us to the extent that they 
should trust us. Because you have to follow the money. And if 
you look at the last news story . . . And they could say it was 
printed, hey, we’re out there, we’re transparent. Kind of. That’s 
after the reporters dig it up, and they’re forced to. But why 
don’t we have fair and transparent election laws dealing with 
accountability? 
 
You know the minister, the former minister of Justice, the now 
Minister of Education, is saying we’ve got all that information. 
What more could we want? We want fairness. We want 
fairness. We want Saskatchewan elections to belong to 
Saskatchewan people, not to Ontario lawyers, not to Ontario 
lawyers or Calgary real estate people. You know as nice as 
those people may be and as fortunate as . . . [inaudible] . . . 
people have too many questions. And we saw this happen last 
time, where you have big questions about, why is it they 
hammer the working poor in their budget and give the wealthy 

tax cuts? Is it any coincidence, is it any coincidence at all? 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I have lots to say about this, but I know 
we’re running short on time. I know that we’ll have many 
people who want to speak to this issue, but I want to move 
second reading of Bill No. 606, An Act to amend The Election 
Act, 1996 to provide fairness and accountability in election 
fundraising. I do so move. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member for Regina Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise this afternoon to not only satisfy the procedure of how to 
further move this bill but also to add my support to my 
colleague with respect to this bill. It’s about fairness, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s about levelling the playing field, Mr. Speaker. I 
don’t know what members opposite are so afraid of, but this is 
an important piece of legislation that needs to pass and it needs 
to pass immediately. 
 
This is what we’re seeing being passed in other jurisdictions. 
Often Saskatchewan is called the wild west of donations, of 
donation rules, Mr. Speaker, so it’s just a matter of catching us 
up to the other provinces and levelling the playing field, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s what the people of Saskatchewan want. It’s 
what the province wants. It’s what our constituents want, Mr. 
Speaker. They want to be able to have that level of confidence 
in their elected officials, and this is another piece for us to do 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m looking forward to further discussion on this bill. I’m 
hopeful that members opposite will see how important this bill 
is, see how important it is for us as a province to catch up, 
frankly, with other provinces. We’re not asking for anything 
more than what we’ve seen other jurisdictions do, Mr. Speaker, 
and to allow that level of fairness and accountability and 
transparency that is required of us as legislators, Mr. Speaker. 
So on that note, I’d move to adjourn debate on this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Douglas Park has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 606. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved to 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until Monday at 
1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:29.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3567 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3567 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3567 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Hindley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3567 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3567 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3567 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3568 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3568 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Hindu Society of Saskatchewan Hosts Annual Banquet 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3568 
 Snowlandia Outdoor Program Held in Saskatoon 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3569 
 Last Mountain Distillery Recognized at Canadian Whisky Awards 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3569 
 Small Homes Exhibit Featured at Saskatchewan Science Centre 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3569 
 Moose Jaw Warriors Win Scotty Munro Memorial Trophy 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3569 
 Basketball Teams Advance to Provincial Finals 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3570 
 Opposition Claims 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3570 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Rail Transportation Issues 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3570 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3570 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3571 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3571 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3571 
 Management of Global Transportation Hub 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3572 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3572 
 Funding for Classroom Supports 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3572 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3573 
 Costs and Benefits of Carbon Capture and Storage 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3573 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3573 
 Release of Information on Oil Spill 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3574 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3574 
 Second Bridge for Prince Albert 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3574 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3574 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3575 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Delays in Rail Transportation of Commodities 
  Bradshaw ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3575, 3584 
  Beck ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3577, 3584 
  Kirsch ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3578, 3584 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 3580, 3584 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3581 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3582, 3584 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3584 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3584 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3585 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3585 



 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 606 — The Election (Fairness and Accountability) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3585 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3588 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 




