


















































April 16, 2018 Hansard Evening


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 42B  MONDAY, APRIL 16, 2018, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3827 
 April 16, 2018 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 7 p.m., resume debate on budget 
motion and amendment. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
once again pleased to rise in my place and continue debate as it 
pertains to the budget. And I want to reiterate to the people of 
Saskatchewan a number of points that I raised previously, 
before we broke for supper at 5, in terms of the Tory math 
that’s being employed by the current Saskatchewan Party 
government, Mr. Speaker. As I mentioned, they’ve had record 
revenue. They’ve had record tax hikes last year. And now they 
have a record debt. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to note that from our 
perspective it is always, always important to use every tool in 
the tool box to try and stimulate the economy of Saskatchewan. 
I spoke about the need to get all our resources to markets, and 
that includes oil and gas. That includes of course the farm 
sector, and that includes investments like the uranium industry, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is really, really important for people in Saskatchewan to know 
that on this side of the Assembly we understand the very 
importance of getting our product to market, especially in a 
landlocked province like Saskatchewan. Now what is really 
concerning to a lot of people in the province is, despite the 
rhetoric from members opposite, Mr. Speaker, they have failed 
miserably to achieve those objectives. 
 
And I’ll point out, as I mentioned previously, the fact that 
we’ve had a grain transportation crisis impact this province. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the Assembly, especially 
myself as a northern member, have grown to understand, 
respect, and greatly appreciate the incredible investment that 
agriculture offers to our province, and the fact that it is one of 
the mainstays of our provincial economy. Those were certainly 
taught to me by those that lived and breathed rural 
Saskatchewan here on this side of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
We had great agricultural leaders on our team, and over time 
they taught me the importance of agriculture and the incredible 
financial benefit it offers the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in trying to look at what the Saskatchewan 

Party has failed to do, Mr. Speaker, is they have failed to get the 
product to market. Now I looked at the history of the 
Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, and once again, as I pointed 
out previously, they have not been able to get the job done. 
They had record revenue, Mr. Speaker. Last year they 
completed their record taxation regime, a billion dollars out of 
our economy. 
 
We have record debt today, and yet we have no pipelines, Mr. 
Speaker, and we are still struggling with the grain transportation 
challenge that the province has been suffering under their watch 
for the past five or six years. That is an important, important 
point to raise to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I’ll say this to the rural part of our province, that in our 
caucus we have discussions on how we could re-energize the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] within rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. Our task as the opposition is to not only oppose what 
the government is not doing, Mr. Speaker, but to also propose, 
and that’s one of the important messages that we have when we 
sit down as a caucus and talk about challenges that we face as a 
province. And what rural Saskatchewan faces as a region, we 
face as a province, so it’s important that we recognize that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ll point that out because obviously my 
more learned colleagues in the NDP caucus know a lot more 
about rural Saskatchewan than I ever will, but clearly we have 
understood that we have to reach out to rural Saskatchewan, 
that we have to re-engage rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I pointed out that the challenges the Sask Party have, Mr. 
Speaker, is that they have not been able to deliver. As I 
mentioned, no pipeline under Wall, no pipeline under Harper, 
Mr. Speaker. And certainly as I’ve mentioned, agricultural 
crisis. These are crises within the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, and they have not been able to get the job done. 
 
Now what other threats exist to our rural part of, the rural part 
of life, Mr. Speaker? The producers of this province; the people 
that raise livestock; and the backbone of our provincial 
economy, the word “agriculture,” Mr. Speaker, what other 
threats exist? And we talk about those threats, Mr. Speaker, 
whether it’s the mad cow disease challenge that I know we 
faced a number of years ago, or whether it’s the changing 
environment, Mr. Speaker, or whether it’s a water crisis. In 
some instances, in some places we don’t have enough moisture. 
In other areas we have too much moisture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we look at that particular aspect. And over time, Mr. 
Speaker, I have been taught by many people within the NDP 
caucus that rural Saskatchewan is important. We’ve got to 
re-energize and refocus and reintegrate certainly some of our 
values and beliefs on how we can be of assistance to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Things like the green economy, Mr. Speaker, those are 
important. Nothing in this budget about the green economy, Mr. 
Speaker. How about the value of carbon sinks on agricultural 
land when they have zero-till practices? That stores carbon in 
our soils, Mr. Speaker. Is that of value to rural Saskatchewan? 
 
How about the whole aspect of a solid water-management 



3828 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

strategy, Mr. Speaker? We know that water is going to be a 
significant challenge in the future, whether there’s too much of 
it, as we currently sometimes experience; or whether there’s not 
enough of it, we have to experience on a pretty consistent basis. 
These are things that we need to address, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Power generation. Is there an opportunity for the agricultural 
sector to morph part of their operations into power generation? 
How about habitat for animals, Mr. Speaker? And also as well, 
to mitigate some of the challenges around climate change. 
 
These are opportunities over time, Mr. Speaker, that we have 
certainly elaborated and spoke about as we sit in caucus about 
rural Saskatchewan. How can we get more engagement? And 
this is a task that we take very seriously and are continuing to 
build on that front. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, again I go back to the point that the 
Saskatchewan Party have failed miserably on two key fronts: 
getting our oil to markets and getting the grain transportation 
crisis solved. They have not been able to achieve any objectives 
on that front, Mr. Speaker. Nothing on this budget that 
recognizes those challenges and yet, Mr. Speaker, they 
continually take rural Saskatchewan for granted. 
 
We know we have our work cut out for us. But we continue to 
believe that they’re a significant part of our economy and that 
they will be a significant solution to the challenges we face not 
only financially but ecologically, and certainly, Mr. Speaker, 
from making sure that Saskatchewan, along with the other 
prairie provinces continue to be the breadbasket of the world. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, diversifying that rural economy is so vitally 
important. It is so important and, Mr. Speaker, we understand 
that from this perspective. 
 
Now there’s two other points I want to make, Mr. Speaker, 
before I take my place. First of all, as you look at the pipeline 
issue . . . And I was glad to hear my leader today articulate his 
support for the pipeline. We know we have to get our oil and 
gas to market. We understand that, Mr. Speaker, and we 
continue supporting that position. We continue supporting that 
pipelines are essential part of our economy, and we’ll continue 
making that message being heard loud and clear, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The challenge we have is that we look at what the federal 
opposition party is doing, the Conservative Party, Mr. Speaker. 
They have said, on this front, too little, too late. Well I would 
say to the conservative party across the way and to the 
Conservative opposition in Ottawa, well Mr. Speaker, they 
weren’t able to get the job done when they were in government. 
So now they’re saying too little, too late. Well you can’t have 
your cake and eat it, too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They failed to be able to deliver on that, as the Saskatchewan 
Party knows. So they can complain all they want off to the side, 
but they failed to get the job done. At the very least on this side 
of the Assembly, whether it’s the NDP caucus in this Assembly 
or the Alberta Premier and, Mr. Speaker, even credit to the 
Prime Minister for advocating for this pipeline and pushing it 
through, Mr. Speaker. That pipeline can indeed become a good 
possibility and that will help the Saskatchewan economy. We 
understand that on this side of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
really important for the people of Saskatchewan to know that. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll also point out, I’ll also point out about 
the challenges that we see as you talk about the bad investments 
in this budget made by the Saskatchewan Party caucus. Mr. 
Speaker, in the business world we do not have a problem with 
the word “profit.” It is essentially an important part of business, 
small or big. Profit has always been driven by industry, Mr. 
Speaker, and it is not a bad word. Profit is a good word. That’s 
what you want to see happen to all the business people and the 
corporations, Mr. Speaker, because they in turn create jobs and 
create opportunity. 
 
But you look at the GTH, the Global Transportation Hub, the 
challenges we have around the Global Transportation Hub. It’s 
when friends of the Saskatchewan Party make millions of 
dollars in profit on land that was overpaid for that could have 
been used somewhere else. That is the problem we have, Mr. 
Speaker. That is the problem. When we have friends of the 
Saskatchewan Party making millions — and I’m not 
exaggerating here, Mr. Speaker, they’re making millions — on 
land deals that we’re paying much, much more than what that 
land is worth. 
 
So that’s the fundamental problem, Mr. Speaker. This is the 
issue that we’re raising. And that money could have been used 
for a wide variety of opportunity, Mr. Speaker. It could have 
helped the uranium industry come back in northern 
Saskatchewan. It could have been resources to help deal with 
the suicide crisis of many of the northern indigenous 
communities. It could help with backfilling the cuts to 
education and health care, Mr. Speaker, but no. No, no. 
 
There’s a significant difference between making a profit and 
between lining your friends’ pockets. And Mr. Speaker, the 
Global Transportation Hub done exactly that. It backfilled 
pockets of the insiders and friends of the Saskatchewan Party at 
the expense of other projects in the province of Saskatchewan 
and at the expense of the provincial taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now these bad land deals, Mr. Speaker, end up costing us a lot 
of money. No, no recognition of that in this budget. No 
admission by the Saskatchewan party, and I say to them, shame 
on them. Because we need to know exactly what transpired 
there and why we continue paying, I think the amount that 
we’re talking about on the GTH land sales is $150 million — 
$150 million we spent on backfilling insiders’ pockets, insiders 
to the Saskatchewan Party, and overpaying for land that wasn’t 
worth that amount. And every single member of the Sask Party 
caucus know that, Mr. Speaker. We know that they know. And 
not a peep from them, Mr. Speaker. Not a peep from them. 
 
So what happens is now we’re raising taxes a billion dollars. 
Now we have record debt. And, Mr. Speaker, again: nothing 
wrong with profit, but if it comes at a great expense and an 
inflated expense so they can benefit the insider friends of the 
Sask Party, well that does a great injustice to all of us in this 
Assembly and especially to the Saskatchewan people, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s compliments of the Sask Party. 
 
Now I want to close and make a few more comments, Mr. 
Speaker, and then I’ll close on my point. When we talk about 
the P3s [public-private partnership], Mr. Speaker, as part of the 
financial package, from the opposition perspective, and I’ve 
said it many times, when you look at the P3 model, Mr. 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3829 

Speaker, where you’re getting the private sector to up-front the 
money, build the project, and of course we achieve certain 
objectives, we have always maintained that P3s are a valuable 
tool that should be used from time to time. We’ve maintained 
that position, Mr. Speaker. But there are two principles behind 
that, Mr. Speaker. Number one is in the case of the federal 
government. They offered money on a few occasions when it 
comes to a P3 model. And when you talk about P3s, you 
shouldn’t leave money on the table if it furthers your agenda as 
a party and certainly as a province. 
 
The problem we need to undertake, Mr. Speaker, is we have to 
know what are the exact costs to the people of Saskatchewan. I 
think the taxpayers have a right to know what the costs are. And 
on many occasions, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party hid 
those facts from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We need to know. And why is it important to know? And why 
is it important to have control measures in place so to ensure 
that the Saskatchewan people, that Saskatchewan taxpayers 
don’t get hosed, Mr. Speaker? I look no further than the Regina 
bypass project — $2 billion, Mr. Speaker, and the costs are 
climbing. And this is exactly my point, exactly my point of how 
the Sask Party have bungled that project, costing us hundreds of 
millions of dollars more than it should. Because they would not 
come clean with the P3 partnership. They would not share with 
the people of Saskatchewan the inside information on how the 
finances were arranged. 
 
And that’s my point. It is the most glaring example of how this 
government have mismanaged our finances, to the point where 
we’re now looking at $2 billion, Mr. Speaker, $2 billion for a 
semicircle around the city. And there was not a peep from any 
of the Sask Party MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
about the cost overruns and the inside land deals, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And let me assure you, let me assure you that it will eventually 
come out. And the people of Saskatchewan and the opposition 
are waiting patiently for that document to come forward. Goes 
back to my point: P3s are a valuable tool. They should be 
considered by governments, but the government have an 
obligation to make sure those investments are sound and that 
we know what we’re getting into. And the people of 
Saskatchewan, the taxpayers, have a right to know. 
 
[19:15] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we spoke about the challenges on the budget. 
We spoke about the issues that the Saskatchewan Party have 
bungled. And I know I can go on for hours if I need be. But it’s 
important to also propose, as I’ve indicated, the value of some 
of the P3s option, the incredible opportunity for rural 
Saskatchewan, the engagement of the indigenous communities 
and the Aboriginal people so that we can all applaud the 
renaissance of the Aboriginal people throughout the province. 
 
These are things that we aspire as an opposition to achieve, Mr. 
Speaker: “from many peoples, strength.” And the Sask Party 
has steadfastly refused to engage the Aboriginal people, refused 
to engage the northern Saskatchewan part of this province. 
 
They have ignored, on many occasions, the educators and the 
health care professionals that have come forward with some of 

these concerns. And today, what is the result of that vision by 
the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker? Record debt, record tax 
increases — yet they had record revenue for 10 years. It just 
does not make any sense. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll finish on this note. It was with a great 
amount of interest that I looked at this advertisement. And on 
this side of the Assembly, on this side of the Assembly, we said 
we know, we know you guys have mismanaged the economy 
and that you have, through a variety of very bad decisions and 
lack of oversight, Mr. Speaker, that you’ve bungled our 
financial affairs. We have seen that time and time again. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but you look at the GTH. I spoke 
earlier about $150 million spent on land deals that helped their 
insider friends. They built a big hole, Mr. Speaker, a big hole 
around GTH. And just when I thought that was enough, Mr. 
Speaker, I looked at a document today. Now they want to sell 
that hole they put us into. And I quote from this advertisement: 
“For sale — Regina bypass borrow pit.” And it’s a picture of a 
big hole, Mr. Speaker. It’s a big hole, and it’s a borrow pit. 
They want to sell the hole they put us in. I’m trying to figure 
that out. How do you sell a hole you put us in? 
 
Well these guys figured it out. So I said, what would a hole be 
worth? Well they want 2.5 million bucks for that hole. We put 
$2 billion in that hole. We’re getting 1 per cent back . . . is that 
1 per cent? I’m sorry I’m not a finance whiz. But they got this 
big hole. They built this big hole, threw 2 billion bucks in that 
hole, and they took the money out, whoever took the money out 
took it out. And then they said, okay now that hole — we put 
you in the hole — is now for sale. 
 
So how do you sell a hole? Well they’re figuring out how to do 
that, Mr. Speaker — two and a half million dollars. And one of 
the ideas they come up with is, oh it’s deemed agricultural land. 
Well I don’t know what you can grow in a hole. I wouldn’t 
mind finding out what you can grow in a hole. 
 
And then they said, oh it might be used for wildlife refuge. 
Maybe, maybe we’ll build a pond and the ducks could land 
there. Well what are you going to charge the ducks? You know, 
they’re not going to pay 2.5 million to land there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So if you want to buy a hole, if you want to buy a hole, the 
Regina bypass hole, there’s one for sale here. There’s one for 
sale. That’s how silly the Saskatchewan Party appear, Mr. 
Speaker. So on trying to recover some of the costs on the GTH, 
Mr. Speaker, you can’t sell the hole you’re putting us in. It 
won’t sell. It won’t sell, Mr. Speaker. So I want to get the Page 
to Xerox this and share this with the entire caucus, and this is 
the hole for sale. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important in my closing 
comments to point out to the people of Saskatchewan this: in 
order for us to have the imagination and support of the people 
on our side, we have a lot of work to do as the opposition. We 
understand that, Mr. Speaker. We have a lot of work to do. I’ll 
re-emphasize that, Mr. Speaker. But on our side, it’s important 
that we acknowledge the people of Saskatchewan, right from 
rural Saskatchewan to northern Saskatchewan to the most 
vulnerable. We also have to recognize the business community, 
the large and corporate partners that stimulate our economy, 



3830 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

create jobs, and invest in our province. We understand that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan are ready 
for change, because they have seen too much of the 
Saskatchewan Party and how they’ve bungled their way for the 
last 10 years of record revenue. They did not develop that 
decade of record revenue; they inherited it, Mr. Speaker. They 
inherited that record revenue. They did not develop it, but 
somehow they found a way to mess it up. They found a way to 
mess it up. 
 
So I’ll close on this comment. I am going to support the 
amendment presented by my colleague, the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. I think her vision and her plan and her 
response to the budget challenges in Saskatchewan are right on. 
People of Saskatchewan ought to know what exactly the Sask 
Party is up against. 
 
And I’ll complete on this small phrase: record revenue, record 
tax increases, and now we have record debt. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
the Saskatchewan Party legacy. That’s the Saskatchewan Party 
legacy. And yes, it got them through three elections. But the 
words I have to all of them: was it worth it? Was it worth it? All 
the manipulation, was it worth it? And I say to them, it was not. 
Because one of these days you’re going to be asked why you 
put three extra MLAs in. Maybe some young child will ask you 
or some smart grade 12 student may ask you 10 years from 
now, you know, why did you do that? And who is 
gerrymander? Just tell them gerrymander’s not a person; it’s a 
process we use to win elections. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I hope it’s worth it. I hope it’s worth it. And 
I would also point out to the member from Cannington . . . The 
member from Cannington is speaking from his chair. He’s 
speaking from his chair, Mr. Speaker. Does he support people 
investing into the pipeline, the Trans Mountain pipeline? Does 
he believe in investing in the railway system, Mr. Speaker, to 
get our grain transportation to market? Well if he does, then 
he’s admitting all this time that the NDP were right to defend 
rural Saskatchewan, that the NDP were right to protect railroad 
rights to make sure our grain got to . . . [inaudible] . . . and that 
the NDP were right to invest in the oil distribution system to 
make sure we got our product to market. 
 
For them to stand up today and admit that we should invest in 
railroads, we should invest into pipelines, Mr. Speaker, it goes 
back to my point. All they were good at is complaining about 
what the other parties were about, because they didn’t have 
nothing on their agenda, nothing to promote hope and 
opportunity for this province. 
 
And that’s why we continue fighting against the Saskatchewan 
Party. And we pray that one of these days that the people of 
Saskatchewan agree with us. It’s time for a new vision, new 
plan, new hope, and get rid of the Saskatchewan Party from the 
government benches in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
On that note, I’ll support the amendment as proposed by my 
colleague from Saskatoon Nutana. Thanks. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know 

whether I could have drawn a worse speaking order. How do 
you follow a great orator from the North? I don’t know how it 
can be done. But I would show him that these are my own 
notes. I wrote them myself. They didn’t come from the 
backroom, if he cares to examine my handwriting. 
 
Anyway, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I begin I would just 
like to add my voice to congratulating you on being elected to 
that lofty Chair. I appreciate the great job that you’re doing, but 
I would add a comment, that the hinterland has never been the 
same since you left. So we do miss you over in this corner. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on track: what does that mean? Unlike what the 
opposition Finance critic may think — wrongly, I might add — 
that we have no plan, well, Mr. Speaker, we do. And that’s how 
we know that we are on track, on track to have a balanced 
budget in 2019-2020, a plan that was formulated in our last 
budget. 
 
It seems to escape the members opposite that to know your plan 
is working you first have to have a plan. Unlike their leader’s 
campaign promises, unaccounted for, uncosted, but that could 
cost the taxpayers $2.5 billion a year, and worst of all, no plan 
to pay it back — that’s no plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, before I get further into addressing this 
budget, I must do something that we never do enough, and that 
is to say thank you. First of all I’d like to say thank you to our 
Finance minister, to all of our members of treasury board, and 
certainly to all the people working in Finance department for 
delivering this budget. You know, it’s literally a year-long task 
to present a budget and we commend them for doing that. 
 
Secondly, I would like to say thank you to my wife and my 
family for putting up with me I guess, in the first place, but for 
supporting me and carrying on when I am unable to be there 
while I’m doing the things necessary as an MLA: to my eldest 
son Dallin and his wife, Janelle, and their two beautiful 
daughters, Kaylee and Macey; to Carla and Broc, and their 
daughter, Quinn; and to my youngest son, Calvin, and Jess, and 
his two boys, Deklan and Carter. We thank them very much for 
all that they do and all their support that they give me. 
 
And thank you to my two great CAs [constituency assistant], 
Lillian Robinson and Amanda Humenny. They do such a great 
job of taking care of whatever constituent concerns may come 
along, and I could never thank them enough. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to at this point just thank my 
executive on my committee back in The Battlefords: our 
president, Bart Wood, who is also a tireless worker during the 
campaign, a tireless door knocker — we appreciate all his work; 
Al White, who is my business manager and the treasurer of our 
constituency; Carolyn, who is our secretary; and Dennis, our 
past president, and Terri-Lynn Cann, his wife. So we thank 
them all for the work. 
 
And of the greatest importance I think, Mr. Speaker, is to say 
thank you to the constituents of The Battlefords for the 
confidence they’ve shown in me. It has been my greatest 
honour to serve and to represent and to be the voice of the 
message between The Battlefords and here in the legislature. 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3831 

And I would just say that I will continue that commitment as 
long as I have the privilege of occupying this chair. 
 
But now, Mr. Speaker, a few brief comments about our on-track 
budget, a budget that certainly continues on the plan that was 
announced last year. This opposition is always confused by or 
has trouble understanding the investments we have made for the 
people and the tax saving they have enjoyed. 
 
So firstly, just a little bit about we have accomplished in recent 
years. We’ve reduced our operating debt — our credit card 
debt, if you will — that we inherited from them by $1 billion. 
We have invested $12.5 billion in infrastructure since 2007. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to invest in infrastructure. 
 
Of that 12.5 billion, Mr. Speaker, 1.4 billion went to health care 
infrastructure: hospitals in Moose Jaw, the Sask Hospital in 
North Battleford — and more about that later — children’s 
hospital, and 15 long-term care homes. Eight billion in 
Highways, that’s an unprecedented investment for this 
province; 1.5 billion to build or repair schools; and billions in 
Crown capital. All of this in spite of dramatically reduced 
non-renewable resource revenue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in ’08-09 those revenues accounted for 32 per cent 
of our budget. Today that number has been reduced to 10 per 
cent. That’s a huge hole to fill on our revenue side. Just to give 
you a couple of examples, Mr. Speaker, in 2014 the West Texas 
Intermediate price for oil was $107.95 a barrel, and it dropped 
to a low of $26.19 a barrel in 2016. Potash was at a high of 
$323 a tonne in January of 2014, and it dropped to a low of 
$214 a tonne in February of ’17. And today it’s still only at 
$222 a tonne. It’s the same story, Mr. Speaker, for uranium — 
$44 a pound in November of 2014, to a low of $18 in December 
of ’16, and the spot price this month is still at a meagre $21 a 
tonne. 
 
Even with these drops, we’ve continued to invest in the 
infrastructure, the health, and social programs for our people of 
this province, things like hiring 750 more doctors and 3,400 
more nurses of all designations; $8.55 million for autism 
services — that’s an astronomical increase of 1,600 per cent 
since 2007; $2.7 billion invested in mental health and 
addictions. And of course something that’s close to my heart, 
Mr. Speaker, we have more than doubled the funding for the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. 
 
[19:30] 
 
In education, Mr. Speaker, we’re investing 2.5 times more than 
what was invested under the opposition in 2007. This year our 
social service budget is 1.18 billion, which is the largest in this 
province’s history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the same time we were making these 
much-needed investments, we’ve been able to make tax 
reductions for some of our citizens totalling $5.9 billion. We’ve 
taken 112,000 people right off the provincial tax rolls. Our 
provincial income tax is down by $4.3 billion, education 
property tax down 1.3 billion. That’s what we’ve done for our 
lower-income but hard-working people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess while on the topic of taxes, this budget 

contains no increases in the tax rates. That has been one of the 
main comments that I’ve heard from my constituents over the 
last week. They are so grateful that we have held the line on tax 
rates. 
 
That’s one of the comments I’ve heard, but even more often 
I’ve heard, not only in the past days but over the last several 
months and especially during the campaign for leader and the 
new Premier . . . And I’d like to take this opportunity to lend 
my voice to congratulate our new Premier on being elected and 
thank him for all that he’s done in the recent times that he has 
been our Premier. 
 
And the comment that I heard was, make sure that whoever 
wins opposes the Trudeau carbon tax. This came from not only 
our supporters, but many I know that may not have voted for us 
the last time, but I am certain that they’re going to vote for us 
this next time. Mr. Speaker, I can probably fill all of the seats in 
this Legislative Assembly and all of the galleries with the 
people that have talked to me about making sure that we oppose 
the carbon tax and do not let it ever come to Saskatchewan, 
totally unlike what the Leader of the Opposition says. And not 
one of those people that would be in this gallery would agree 
with him when he says that, and I quote, “Opposing this tax is a 
costly crusade, a pointless crusade.” A pointless crusade to save 
our taxpayers a potential $2.5 billion a year? I hardly think so, 
Mr. Speaker. We are not going to roll over. We’re not going to 
wave the white flag as the members opposite would have us do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our made-in-Saskatchewan plan is a far better 
solution to reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and that is at 
Boundary dam 3. We’ve heard in this House that we have now 
sequestered 2 million tonnes of CO2. That’s like taking 500,000 
cars right off our roads. That’s the way to reduce emissions, not 
a carbon tax that would cripple our Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the honour of attending COP21 in Paris, as 
did Premier Brad Wall and several officials from SaskPower 
Corporation, and the overwhelming support and interest in this 
project was very evident. In fact, in the UN Secretariat 
mid-conference report they highlighted Boundary dam 3 as 
Canada’s major contribution to greenhouse gas emissions 
reductions. Not carbon taxes and not cap-and-trade scheming — 
real reductions. It’s a shame that international organizations 
realize the value of this technology, but the opposition in our 
own province can’t figure it out. 
 
Prior to attending COP21, I, along with my learned colleague 
from Carrot River Valley, toured several coal-fired electricity 
plants in Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi, along with 
engineers from SaskPower Corporation who were instrumental 
in the start-up and operation of Boundary dam 3. Mr. Speaker, 
the engineers that we met at the various plants we visited were 
so appreciative of the opportunity to learn more about our 
post-combustion capture of CO2, the first of its kind in the 
world. In fact, several of those engineers made arrangements to 
come to tour Boundary dam 3 to learn more. Again, so sad our 
opposition can’t appreciate the value of the emissions we are 
capturing. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I also toured this facility with the federal 
Minister of Environment and Climate Change Canada, 
Catherine McKenna, and later as well with federal ministers 



3832 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

Goodale and Carr. Ms. McKenna was immediately tweeting out 
the great work being done at Boundary dam 3 and the value of 
this technology. And I must also add the great value of our 
agriculture and our forestry sector, and the carbon sinks that is 
entitled there. And I understand that if we were ever to get 
credit for those carbon sinks, we would be considered a net 
emitter in this province. 
 
The value of the technology at Boundary dam 3 is indisputable, 
in my opinion. Unfortunately once Minister McKenna returned 
to Ottawa, we heard no more from her. It’s like she took a big 
gulp of the Trudeau Kool-Aid. Or maybe it’s as Rex Murphy 
said in a recent speech that I heard him give — tongue in cheek, 
I’m sure — and I’ll paraphrase here, but his comment was to 
the effect that as people fly west from Ottawa, their IQ 
[intelligence quotient] tends to increase. However, 
unfortunately the converse is also true. As they fly back east, it 
tends to decrease. Maybe he’s on to something here. I’m not 
sure. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, I can assure my constituents and all 
citizens of the province that I will stand with our Premier and 
support him in his fight to never have a carbon tax in this 
province. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, before I wrap up here, as I know my 
colleagues will have more to say later, I’d just like to comment 
on the importance of this budget for my own constituency of 
The Battlefords. Revenue sharing for the city of North 
Battleford sits at $2.52 million, and that’s in very sharp contrast 
to the 1.15 million they received in ’07-08. The same is true for 
the town of Battleford — 880,000 in this budget compared to 
407,000 in ’07-08. As well, the city will not see any reductions 
to the grants-in-lieu funding, for which they were very 
appreciative. 
 
Our school boards have seen a significant increase in PMR 
[preventative maintenance and renewal] funding of up to 15 per 
cent. Mr. Speaker, we certainly welcome the $34 million 
announcement that’s budgeted for our Sask Hospital North 
Battleford, which is the largest infrastructure project in my 
constituency. Mr. Speaker, this is a phenomenal facility, one for 
which all patients and staff are anxiously awaiting. 
 
I had an opportunity to tour the hospital recently, and it is truly 
state of the art. And I’d just like to send out a great big thank 
you to the fundraising team who I understand are at about 80 
per cent of their goal to raise $8 million for furnishings and 
equipment for our new hospital. Great job and thanks to all of 
those that are involved. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, something for which the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford and I are very excited about, and that is two 
sets of passing lanes between North Battleford and Cochin. This 
is an extremely busy stretch of highway with tourist traffic and 
traffic from the North, as this is a major connector to the 
Northwest and to the North of our province. This is certainly 
great news in our part of the province. 
 
One final comment, Mr. Speaker, if I may, and that is regarding 
the nearly $6 million in this budget to address crime issues 
identified in our rural crime committee report. I was honoured 
to be part of that committee along with my colleagues from Cut 

Knife-Turtleford, Cypress Hills, Canora-Pelly, Estevan, Regina 
Coronation Park, and Saskatoon Fairview. I am very pleased to 
see that significant funding is being allocated to this very 
important initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d just say in closing that I believe this on-track 
budget — that is in fact that, on track to get to balance by 
2019-2020 — is exactly what our province needs, with $14.24 
billion in revenue, and that’s up point six per cent from budget 
’17-18, and 14.61 billion in expense, and that is down 1.4 
billion from budget of ’17-18. 
 
We’ve reduced the deficit in this budget to 365 million. It’s 
easy to see that we are indeed on track. For that reason, Mr. 
Speaker, I will be supporting the budget motion and certainly 
will not ever support the amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to join in the budget debate. I think it’s been a couple of 
years since I’ve been up doing the budget debate. As my job as 
House Leader I was busy organizing, not speaking, Mr. 
Speaker. But I’m very excited. 
 
First off, I think it’s . . . Everybody has done this, and I have not 
yet rose to my feet and spoken about the Humboldt Broncos 
tragedy. And my heart breaks for the families, breaks for the 
families who have lost, breaks for the survivors, and breaks for 
the whole community, Mr. Speaker. I think all of us in this 
Chamber witnessed an absolutely atrocious event, and it’s hard 
to put that into words, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve felt our love and support from all over Saskatchewan, all 
over Canada, and around the world, Mr. Speaker. So I do want 
to say that my heart and my prayers are with all of those with 
the Humboldt Broncos and the community of Humboldt and the 
hockey community, as my son is a member of the hockey 
community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So on that, I’ll just touch on this a little bit more. I have to give 
my thanks, my admiration to the Minister of Finance, first of all 
for presenting this budget, and secondly for presenting the 
budget in the circumstances that were presented to her. She is 
an amazing woman, an inspiration to all of us, to all political 
parties. And I want to give her my thanks for doing that and for 
mentoring me through my first budgetary process, Mr. Speaker, 
as the former minister, two-time former minister of Social 
Services, and also my predecessor, the Minister of Advanced 
Education right now, who mentored me quite a bit in the 
process of taking on this enormous file and this enormous 
responsibility to look out for our most vulnerable in our 
community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with that, I want to . . . just a few quick thank yous to some 
family members. My mother and father who are down in Palm 
Springs, sweating out the 105 degree heat down there, Mr. 
Speaker, and complaining about it every day. And it is very 
depressing. They said they hit 38 degrees and I said, so did we, 
but one was talking about Celsius, one was talking about 
Fahrenheit, Mr. Speaker. So I wanted to say hello to my mom 
and my father who are down there, coming back from their six 
months of suntanning down in Palm Springs. 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3833 

My kids, Mr. Speaker. My daughter Courtney who . . . I just 
texted her recently just to turn on the legislative channel 
because I know everybody’s turning on the legislative channel 
tonight, Mr. Speaker. So I just wanted to say hello to her and 
that I love you, honey. My son Carter who is probably having a 
nap right now because he’s 15 and perpetually exhausted, Mr. 
Speaker. And my stepdaughter Kassidy who’s now living in 
Regina, as well as my stepdaughter Keely who is contemplating 
her future in life with university and potentially going into 
nutrition, so very excited about that. 
 
And of course my lovely wife, Leanne. I can’t thank her enough 
for everything that she’s done through a very busy time in our 
life while she’s been fighting her own illnesses, Mr. Speaker. 
She’s always been there to be very supportive of me and my 
children. 
 
And not too often that somebody publicly thanks their ex-wife, 
but I would want to get that in because she’s helped out 
tremendously. My ex-wife Cari and her husband, Dan, have 
helped out tremendously while I’ve been away and adjusting 
the schedule. So it’s very much appreciated on that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Don’t think I’ve ever got that on the 
record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — It is on the record. I’ll send it to her as 
well. My CAs, Debbs and Dani, I thank you very much. I see 
them Friday for about a half an hour to go in and do my 
constituency work, sign a bunch of stuff, have a couple of 
meetings with some constituents, and then I’m gone. And I very 
much appreciate all they’ve done. 
 
And my ministerial staff, that has been great. We’ve had a lot of 
changeover in my minister’s office and it’s been great. Dylan, 
Taylor, Morgan Bradshaw — who else have I got? — 
Anna-Maria and Maria, which makes it a little more confusing, 
and Mike. So all of them, thank you very much for all the prep 
work that they do. And my ministerial staff over at Social 
Services, Greg and the team over there, thank you for 
everything that you do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess I would be a little remiss if I didn’t thank 
our Premier. I had the honour of getting elected with the 
Premier in 2011 and we instantly became very good friends. We 
enjoy a lot of the same things: a good joke, a good golf game — 
well not on his part, but you know, we certainly do enjoy a 
good golf game and let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, he does hit a 
mighty long ball. None of us know where it’s going but it is 
going. It is absolutely going a long ways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I wanted to publicly thank my friend and the Premier. And 
he’s done an absolutely outstanding job in some very difficult 
times that our province has seen since his start of being the 
Premier. He’s showed resilience and he has continued the 
legacy that Premier Wall . . . of instilling pride within the 
people of Saskatchewan. So I thank my friend for stepping up 
and taking this. And I want to thank all the leadership 
candidates. They all did a fabulous job. It was a great 
leadership, it was friendly leadership, challenging and 
exhausting for all the candidates and all those involved. So I 
thank everybody for putting their name forward, Mr. Speaker. 

[19:45] 
 
I guess I could start talking about a couple of things on the 
budget — I’m not sure on my time here — but I’ll get to Social 
Services in a bit. But as the Deputy Premier and the Minister of 
Education has mentioned several times, our future is our kids. 
And as a father of four, nothing is more important than 
education. And I think in this budget as well as previous 
budgets, Mr. Speaker, we have demonstrated our commitment 
to our children . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Me? Like I 
haven’t said anything yet. 
 
Anyways, education is an absolute priority and our Premier, 
right after his first cabinet meeting, sat down and we came up 
with a commitment. A promise made was a promise kept of 
putting an extra $30 million into our education to make sure 
that the school boards would be able to allocate what they 
needed, whether that was teachers or whether that was teachers’ 
assistants, that we would let the school boards decide but we 
wanted to make sure that those positions and that money went 
right into the front line, Mr. Speaker. And the Minister of 
Education and Deputy Premier, and the Premier, that was their 
top priority. First thing that we did with the new cabinet that 
was sworn in is make that commitment solid, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’ve heard nothing but praises from the school system, from 
the parents, and the students. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m very glad 
that we’ve made that investment in education, and the total 
education budget is now at $2.5 billion, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
pre-kindergarten to grade 12. That’s an astonishing amount to 
be able to invest. Now that is operating, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve also had the privilege of building new schools. Why are 
we building new schools, Mr. Speaker? It’s because our 
population is growing. People are continually coming to 
Saskatchewan from across Canada and around the world to call 
this place home. 
 
And I don’t know if they’re coming here for the weather, Mr. 
Speaker, but I think they are coming here because they see this 
as an opportunity, an opportunity that my family and I saw back 
in 1988 when not a lot of people were emigrating from Toronto 
to Regina, Mr. Speaker. But we certainly saw the potential in 
Saskatchewan and have absolutely never looked back. I go back 
to Toronto to visit family, I go back to Toronto for meetings, 
but I don’t miss the city of Toronto. I miss my family and I miss 
my friends, but because of social media it’s very good to be 
able to keep up with them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But our education is extremely, extremely important for many 
reasons. It creates the next generation, and we want to have the 
opportunities here for that next generation that’s going through 
the school system, whether it be K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 
12] or in our advanced ed. We want them to have the 
opportunities right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to see 
the potential that Saskatchewan has, the community that we 
have, the community on a small scale but also on a large scale. 
It’s tough to go anywhere at any sporting event across Canada 
without seeing a green Rider jersey. And the community 
support is good. 
 
We probably wouldn’t have that many Rider jerseys if we 
didn’t have a mass exodus for 16 long years, Mr. Speaker, 
where our greatest export during the 16 years of the NDP was 



3834 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

the people of Saskatchewan in my generation that left this 
province. Now a lot of them are returning, Mr. Speaker, which 
is great to see. They’re coming back here with business 
opportunities. They’re coming back there with their children or 
sometimes even their grandchildren, Mr. Speaker, but they are 
working on growing this province from the inside, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to touch on a couple of other things, Mr. Speaker, and 
certainly what is first and foremost to everybody in 
Saskatchewan these days is our economy. And the reason that 
we want to grow our economy, Mr. Speaker, is so we can 
provide for education, for highways, for health, for social 
services, for advanced education. The only way that we can do 
this without debt financing, Mr. Speaker, is to grow our 
economy. 
 
Now other provinces and our federal government have decided 
that debt financing is something that they’re very interested in. 
They have no plan to pay down our debt. We have a plan and 
we are on track. It’s very exciting to be in Saskatchewan right 
now. And we had some difficult financial times, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s been well documented in this Chamber and outside this 
Chamber as to the resource revenue shortfall that we 
experienced here in Saskatchewan. Nobody predicted this, Mr. 
Speaker, but we had a plan to be able to deal with it while 
continuing investing, while not shocking the economy, Mr. 
Speaker. We wanted to keep things on track in Saskatchewan 
because we know that that’s the best for our generation and 
certainly for the next generation, to make sure that we have a 
plan. 
 
And I think this has been recognized by the credit agencies, the 
banks across Canada. And we are trying to fight a little bit of an 
uphill battle on our economy, Mr. Speaker. Our federal 
government is not very supportive of what we are doing. There 
are investments that are going outside our province and outside 
of our country because of a looming carbon tax, Mr. Speaker, 
which would absolutely kill this economy. 
 
It bothers me right down to my core that the opposition thinks 
that we should take a $62 million handout from the federal 
government to impose a $4 billion tax on the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It just doesn’t add up. And as long 
as I’m an elected official and as long as we have the privilege 
and honour of serving in government, we will make sure that 
there is no carbon tax for the people of Saskatchewan and make 
sure that we represent Saskatchewan on a provincial level but 
also on the federal level, that they know that this is a job-killing 
tax, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In touching about health, Mr. Speaker, some of the things that 
certainly, as a father of a child with different abilities, it’s great 
to see that we have an investment of individualized funding for 
autism and autism spectrum disorder. Mr. Speaker, this is 
critically important. What this is, for people that aren’t familiar 
with this, Mr. Speaker, is it’s allowing the parents to ultimately 
decide what is the best course of action for their child with 
autism spectrum disorder. Mr. Speaker, this allocates $4,000 for 
each child with autism spectrum disorder that they can look at 
whether they want to look at ABA, which is applied behaviour 
analysis, whether they want to have the different types of 
speech therapy, Mr. Speaker. We want to make sure that the 
parents have the choice to be able to do that. And we want to 

make sure that we have the services available for them to be 
able to work with the school system, Mr. Speaker, as well as the 
health care system to make sure that they have some input in 
what is going to be best for their child, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one of the other things that I know the newly minted 
Leader of the Opposition asked for, which we’re already 
working on — and obviously they claim credit for this — was 
universal coverage for HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] 
medications. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen that if we can get in and 
we can treat HIV and AIDS [acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome] at a very early point, the impact on the individual, 
which is most important, can be minimized and with medication 
they can be able to function at a very high level. But, Mr. 
Speaker, if we don’t have that, then we have some medical 
costs, short term and long term, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some of the other things that I want to touch on, Mr. Speaker, is 
. . . Obviously I’ll get into my ministry a little bit, with Social 
Services, but the biggest thing in Social Services that I am most 
proud of, Mr. Speaker, is that we were able to allocate $10.4 
million for those that are helping the most vulnerable in our 
community. These are front-line people, Mr. Speaker, that are 
working with adults with intellectual disabilities, physical 
disabilities. These are the people that are on the front line and 
they have a very challenging job, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Their 
job is to take care of the most vulnerable, and they do a 
fabulous job. 
 
And through some great support by my caucus colleagues and 
my cabinet colleagues, certainly my predecessor, and the 
Minister of Finance, we were able to allocate this money and 
we had unanimous support. Nobody that I talked to said that 
this was the wrong decision, to make sure that the most 
vulnerable were taken care of and that the people that were 
taking care of the most vulnerable were taken care of too, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And it wasn’t too long ago we were at a SARC [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rehabilitation Centres] event in the Legislative 
Building where I got called out on the carpet by a lady with a 
disability. And she came right up to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and said, “You better take care of the three people that are 
looking after me,” and called me out in front of my colleagues, 
in front of the opposition, and in front of the disability 
community. 
 
So I’m happy to be able to say that we’ve fulfilled that promise. 
I couldn’t tell her at the time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, due to the 
budget confidentiality, but I did write her a little note saying, 
I’ll do my best to take care of the people that take care of you. 
And it was a great moment. And then after that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, she came back at me one more time, and she made me 
make sure that I promised her and I promised her care workers 
that I would take care of them. And I think we’ve taken a huge 
step in that direction, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
A couple of the other things that I wanted to touch on, Mr. 
Speaker, was foster families. This is something that again is a 
very challenging job. When a child is going into a foster family, 
they have some challenging situations that they need to deal 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3835 

with. They might have multiple foster children. They might 
have their own children, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But we need to make sure that we take care of them as well and 
we make it viable for them to be doing this. They are doing a 
ton of work, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I wanted, as well with 
my caucus colleagues and my cabinet colleagues and the 
support of treasury board — I forgot the support of treasury 
board — to be able to make sure we take care of them. 
 
We have some challenging times in our child and family 
services, Mr. Speaker, and the social workers that do the job, 
they’re not looking at trying to take families apart. They’re 
trying to keep them together, Mr. Speaker. And sometimes that 
is a very winding path. And we want to make sure, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that when they’re on that path that we keep 
reunification as much as possible. We want to keep contact with 
the parents. We’ve seen some exciting information about the 
contact with the parents as long as they have . . . And the 
reunification of the family, that’s what we want. First and 
foremost we have to have the child’s best interest and their 
safety. But if at all possible, we want to have the child 
connected with their family in one way, whether that’s in-house 
support, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or whether it’s a connection with 
the family at one point or another. 
 
The other side of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is we want to make 
sure that they’re in touch with their culture, that if there is a 
cultural component or a religious component, that we have 
some contact with that because that’s important. It’s not just 
always about the person. It’s about their culture. And I’ve heard 
some heartbreaking stories when I was in Ottawa about children 
that felt that they had lost their culture. So I’m very proud to 
say that with the help of the FSIN [Federation of Sovereign 
Indigenous Nations], with Vice-chief Pratt as well as with the 
tribal council in Saskatoon and other tribal councils, that we’re 
able to try to work with them to be able to have an elder come 
in and talk to some of the youth. If they want that, we would try 
to make that available with the tribal councils and with FSIN to 
be able to make sure that the children are taken care of. And 
that’s what we want. And I’ve said it many times, Mr. Speaker: 
I want what’s best for that kid, period. That’s all I’m looking at, 
Mr. Speaker, and I think that’s all we’re all looking at on both 
sides of the aisle, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
As far as other things within Social Services, we’ve been able 
to continue our commitment to the Valley View transition, 
another $9.9 million in Valley View. And I had the opportunity 
to tour Valley View just after I was appointed Minister of 
Social Services, and toured the facility and met certainly some 
of the staff but as well as some of the clients of Valley View. 
And some of them have been there for years. 
 
And I’m very proud of the Valley View transition committee as 
well as all of my predecessors in Social Services. We were able 
to do this the right way, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We were able to 
make sure that their Valley View families, which they had been 
living with together for many years, sometimes decades, that 
they were able to keep contact with their family, and we tried to 
move each unit as a whole into a house. 
 
We worked with the families, we worked with the clients, and 
we worked with the staff to make sure that the Valley View 

transition . . . And it has taken a few years, but I’m very proud 
to say that we have done it in the best possible way we could 
with a dated, aging facility. We’ve purchased and renovated 
homes all over Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to try to 
keep those families together. And I even saw a nice picture of 
four former residents of Valley View that were sitting on the 
deck in their home, enjoying a nice cold beverage during the 
summer. And it was very encouraging to be able to see that they 
were experiencing life and they had their family around them, 
not just their genetic family but their Valley View family. And 
we were able to keep that intact. 
 
So I have to thank my predecessors for doing this. I’m sure it 
was very difficult, but it was the right thing to do. And I’m very 
proud when our government does the right thing. It may cost a 
little bit of time and a few dollars, Mr. Speaker, but in the long 
haul it’s the right thing to do. And I’m very proud that we are 
continuing doing the right thing. 
 
[20:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the other things within social services that 
we’ve touched on was . . . And I’ve heard comments from the 
other side about forgetting about the North. And we haven’t 
done that in any level of our government, in any ministry, but 
certainly we’re very, very proud that we have $250,000 to 
operate a new group home in La Ronge for five adults with 
different abilities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So we are investing in 
the North. We are investing in all sides of the province, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’re taking care. 
 
And I can’t do this as Minister of Social Services by myself. 
I’ve got great support. I’ve got great mentors. I’ve got a very 
supportive Premier who is very understanding of what my 
needs . . . or what I see are the needs of the community, falling 
on my background as well as leaning on my colleagues, and 
understanding what the needs are in different communities 
because I don’t have a good feel for, sometimes, what’s 
happening in rural Saskatchewan. So I do touch base with my 
rural colleagues to be able to find out what’s going on there so I 
get a better understanding. And I value their opinion, and I 
encourage them to keep challenging me on what is going to be 
best for rural Saskatchewan within my ministry or the ministry 
that I have the honour of representing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on for a very long time about a lot of 
things, but I know my colleagues want to be able to get up and 
speak about the budget, and I do recognize that. And I very 
much appreciate that, I’m not sure if everybody’s not heckling 
me or if they’ve just kind of had a little power nap, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but it’s been very nice and quiet in the Chamber, 
quieter than I can ever remember it being in here when I’ve 
been speaking. 
 
But I certainly, I certainly can’t support the amendment put 
forward by the member from Nutana. But I certainly do support 
the motion put forward by the Minister of Finance, and I’m 
very proud to support this budget. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 



3836 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Hopefully it remains that quiet while I’m speaking, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — But it might not. It is my privilege to 
rise in the House today to speak in support of last week’s 
budget put forth by the Minister of Finance, my good friend and 
the hon. member from Humboldt. This budget shows that we 
are on track to be back to balance in 1920, maintain a AAA 
credit rating, and continues to lessen our reliance on resource 
revenues, Mr. Speaker. I’ll come back to more things exactly on 
the budget, Mr. Speaker, later on but I just wanted to highlight 
that fact. 
 
I have been fortunate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to have been elected 
by the good people of Prince Albert and represent them over the 
past two years, Mr. Speaker. And all the citizens I represent, 
well I represent Prince Albert Carlton, Mr. Speaker. Prince 
Albert is a small community, and we always feel like we 
represent the entire city and the entire area around Prince 
Albert, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Prince Albert is of course a great city to live in. It’s a great city 
to do business in. And the plus is, Mr. Speaker, that it’s right 
near the lakes. Everybody loves to come through Prince Albert 
up to the lakes, Mr. Speaker. We’re not far away when it’s that 
time to relax. You’re out there and you can go snowmobiling, 
you can go boating in the summertime. You can go out to the 
lake and it’s wonderful. It’s a wonderful place to be, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first and foremost . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Yes, you don’t snowmobile in the summer, but you know, that’s 
okay. Some people do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank a few people first. First and 
foremost is my amazing wife, Fran. She is just an incredible 
lady, Mr. Speaker. And for all the years we had businesses, Mr. 
Speaker, we worked side by side. Our offices were next to each 
other. And well, some people say you can’t work with your 
wife or husband, that they could never do that. We enjoyed it 
thoroughly for many, many years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, if there’s any difficult part with being down 
here and working down here, Mr. Speaker, and being in the 
House is the fact that she’s in Prince Albert and I’m here, and 
we’re just not quite used to that. And in Prince Albert people 
would wonder if I went to someplace by myself, they’d say, 
well where is Fran? They just couldn’t believe that we wouldn’t 
be together at an event. So it’s very rare. That’s the most 
difficult part about being in politics and working out of Regina. 
 
I have four children: two boys and two girls. And I’m a proud 
grandfather of six: three boys and three girls. As you can see, 
we believe in equality, Mr. Speaker, that they’re there and we 
taught our kids well. We taught our kids, you know, this is how 
we do this. This is how we do things. My oldest son, his name’s 
Trent and his wife is Lisa. And they have a nine-year-old son, 
his name is Elias. And he’s in Prince Albert, and he and another 
one of our kids own Riverside Dodge and are doing wonderful 
work there and doing a great job. 

I have a daughter, Angela, and she’s the second oldest. And her 
husband’s name is a real good name; his name is Joe. And 
actually when they got married I strongly suggested, because 
the name was well used before, that they should name him after 
. . . that he should take her last name. But they disagreed and 
they decided to actually take the name of Weinrich. Just an 
average Joe. Just an average Joe. Anyway, Angela’s husband’s 
Joe, and they have two kids. They have Noah and Layla. 
 
And then our third oldest is Colby. Colby and his wife, Becky, 
they also live in Prince Albert. We’re fortunate that Trent and 
Angela and Colby all live in Prince Albert. And they all live 
within blocks of us actually, so we get to go visit with our 
grandkids lots or our grandkids get to come with us. And we 
actually get to take them to McDonald’s regularly, or wherever 
they want to go. Sometimes they get a little more expensive 
taste, they want to go out to Montana’s. But we’re always 
happy to take them out . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And yes, 
we want to go Canadian beef. You notice I never said A&W. 
But anyway, Colby and his wife, Becky, they have two kids. 
They have Hannah and Myles. 
 
And then there’s our youngest daughter, and she’s 31. But her 
name is Jillian and her partner’s name is Greg. And they live in 
Warman, and their daughter’s name . . . And she’s our 
youngest. She’s sort of our latest little grandchild, and she’s 
quite a bit younger than the other one. She’s only 11 months 
old. But she steals grandpa’s heart every time I see her. I don’t 
see her even that often, but yet she recognizes me. She knows 
me, and she wants to sit up on and snuggle into me. And yes, 
they just know how to steal your heart. I should have had them 
first, as I’ve often said. They’re just wonderful. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank a few other people. My 
CA, Joy Schewaga, was down here the other day. I introduced 
her in the House the other day. She’s just a tremendous asset. 
She works hard. People like her; they feel free to talk with her 
about things. She’s done a tremendous job for me, Mr. Speaker, 
and I’m so happy that I could have her. Joy worked for me a 
number of years ago in business, and when the opportunity 
come for me to hire a CA and she was available, there was no 
question as to who I wanted to get. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank my staff here at the 
legislature. And my chief of staff is Angela Currie. She should 
be watching this right now, but I’ll just look at that . . . but I 
think she might not be. She might be crying a little bit because I 
understand that her Boston Bruins have just lost to the Toronto 
Maple Leafs. And I don’t know, I feel for her. I hope she’s not 
sick tomorrow. I hope she comes to work and she’s not sick, but 
it’s pretty sad. 
 
I have two MAs [ministerial assistant]. Caitlin Lane-Graham is 
one; she’s my more senior MA. And Linda Holzer is my more 
junior MA. They both do a tremendous job for me, and it’s 
great to have. And my senior admin is Shelley Duke. And you 
know it’s great to have all these ladies in my office. They’re 
great workers. They do their job tremendously. As well they 
kind of spoil me a little bit, and I don’t mind that. So I’m quite 
used to that and I’m grateful. My wife tells them not to, but they 
still do. They’re all a great group and we really appreciate it. 
 
As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to thank our Premier for 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3837 

the confidence that he’s shown in me to bring me back into 
cabinet or to keep me in cabinet, Mr. Speaker, in a portfolio 
with SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] that I 
appreciate. I love business, and the Crowns and CIC [Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] are business. And I 
love business, and I love to do that. I love to do that job, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, family is so very important, especially in light of 
the tragic, tragic events last week involving the Humboldt 
Broncos. I want to give my personal condolences to all the 
families of the victims of the crash. As well, I want to give my 
personal thanks to all the emergency personnel, the first 
responders, and those who just stopped to help on scene and at 
the hospitals. As well, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank those who 
have and are working so hard to comfort the families and those 
affected, Mr. Speaker, and pay tribute to all of those affected. 
 
Never has such tragedy, frankly, brought a community, a 
province, a country, and a world so close together during such 
an awful, awful time. Wherever you go around this province, 
you see the signs of support for the community and surrounding 
areas, making one feel so proud to be part of the best province 
in Canada. 
 
It has made Saskatchewan that, while Saskatchewan is big, it’s 
made us all one small little town. And it gives you that small 
town feeling again, that small community feeling, where we 
talk with strangers at the store. We show more humanity. We 
are actually taking the time to sit face to face and talk instead of 
just sending a text or other social media. It has brought families 
and friends so much closer. 
 
I do hope that this continues on, that it’s not just for a few 
weeks, but that it continues on month after month after month, 
you know, that bringing that closeness of people together. The 
community will need us now and going into the future, but this 
past week we’ve all seen amazing things from all over the 
world — from the money raised, sticks on the porch, jersey day, 
and small community fundraisers. 
 
One of the things that has touched me most was the selfless act 
of Logan Boulet. Logan signed his organ donor card when he 
turned 21, just a few weeks before the tragedy. This selfless act 
has saved six people directly. But even more amazing is the fact 
that in Alberta, more than 10 times the usual amount of people 
have signed up to become organ donors, and in Saskatchewan 
the same thing is happening, as well as the numbers have spiked 
all across Canada. 
 
Along with that, there have been a record amount of people 
giving blood. Logan is an inspiration, and his initial act of 
kindness to donate his organs to six people has now turned into 
a movement that in the long run may help many waiting for 
organ donation and blood services. 
 
Humboldt is strong and has made Saskatchewan people even 
stronger. We will continue to rally around them now and into 
the future. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a little bit about the 
important work that’s done by the people, the good people at 
SGI. Impaired driving is a very serious issue in Saskatchewan 

and is something very near and dear to me. I am so very 
grateful to the Premier for allowing me to work with SGI and 
help curb the number of deaths and injuries in Saskatchewan 
from impaired driving. 
 
We have made substantial changes to impaired driving laws, 
and I thank the member from Regina Lakeview for her support 
that she has given in making sure the changes we have made are 
unanimous. And I appreciate that both sides of the House 
worked together to make sure and realize that this is a problem 
that we need to combat and work together on. But we’re not 
done yet, Mr. Speaker. We will continue to work on this file. 
We’ll continue to do the job until those numbers are down, 
down, down. 
 
We did a recent announcement, Mr. Speaker, on deaths on 
Saskatchewan highways in 2017. That number was the lowest 
number achieved in over 60 years, Mr. Speaker. Now 102 
people, Mr. Speaker, 102 deaths is still 102 deaths too many. 
But it’s down from 125 deaths in 2016. And it’s down from 
148, which is the 10-year average, Mr. Speaker. So that shows 
signs of good improvement, that people are actually starting to 
maybe pay attention, take notice. We hope it’s not just a blip, 
Mr. Speaker. We hope that it continues on for this year and for 
next year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the next few weeks, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be announcing positive 
results on impaired driving as well, showing that the changes 
we have made to drinking and driving, and driving while 
impaired, are making a difference. So stay tuned for that one, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must always remember those and their families 
who have been killed or injured by impaired drivers. We must 
always remember those first responders who have been on the 
scene and had to deal with this tragedy, because all of their lives 
are changed forever, Mr. Speaker, all of their lives. 
 
[20:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the honour of speaking at a school recently, 
along with representatives from Mothers Against Drunk 
Driving and my hon. colleague from Gardiner Park. We were 
speaking to kids that were in grade 7 and grade 8, and showing 
them how impaired driving can be so harmful and change lives 
so, so badly. 
 
It’s these young people that will make the difference, Mr. 
Speaker. It is a generational thing. I remember when I was their 
age, and I related this story to them when I was speaking to 
them. No one wore seat belts when I was young, no one. Most 
cars didn’t even have them in, Mr. Speaker, most cars . . . I 
mean it was nothing. The dashboards were metal. I mean, I 
remember standing beside and having my arm around my dad 
as he was driving, Mr. Speaker. It was just not a big deal. 
Nobody. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, deaths were high then. If you touched the 
brakes you were in trouble. It was just commonplace that you 
hop in the car and drove away. Today, Mr. Speaker, my 
grandchildren would holler and scream if I tried to drive away 
and they didn’t have their seat belts on. 
 



3838 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

I asked those kids, I asked the kids the other day, I said, “Can 
anyone here put up their hand if you’ve ever ridden in a car 
without your seat belt on?” I looked around. Not one of them 
raised their hands, Mr. Speaker. And that is what I hope this 
next generation will be like when it comes to impaired driving. 
One where they will not even think about getting in the vehicle 
if they or the driver has been drinking or taking drugs. 
 
I must tell another story, being as I’m on a story routine. Mr. 
Speaker, I was taught by my father, and I’ve taught my kids, 
that if you want to make a difference, you have to get involved. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is what I have done, and that’s what my 
kids are doing as well. 
 
A few years ago, Mr. Speaker, a gentleman came into one of 
my dealerships to buy a new vehicle. I recognized him 
immediately as my old high school principal, and at that time I 
thought he was pretty mean because I kept getting sent there. 
But he was dealing with one of my staff on purchasing a new 
vehicle, so I just watched. I didn’t say anything. But before he 
left, I went up to him and I introduced myself and I said, I told 
him who I was and that I went to Porcupine Plain High School, 
and did he remember me? And he looked at me, and he looked 
at me kind of funny, and he said, nope, I don’t. And I said, well 
I should say that was really no surprise to me because I was not 
on the valedictorian track. You know, I was like, I said I was in 
his office on a regular basis, and I wasn’t picked as the most 
likely to succeed in my class. Surprise, surprise. 
 
But then he said, then he said, but I remember Elaine Hargrave. 
Would she be your sister? And I said yes, she would be. And he 
said, I remember Ralph Hargrave. Would he be your brother? 
And again I said yes, he would. Of course they were the two 
goody two-shoes of the family, and that’s why he remembered 
them. She was like valedictorian and he was just mister friendly 
RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] guy and all that. But 
nope, he says, but nope, I don’t remember you. 
 
Well he bought a vehicle from us anyway. Thank God he didn’t 
remember that I was one of the kids that sat in his office 
regularly as being in trouble. And on his many trips to the 
dealership in order to get his vehicle serviced and oil changes 
and things like that, he would actually come to my office and 
we’d sit and talk. And a few times we would sit out at our cabin 
at the lake, on the beach or, you know, near the beach area on a 
bench and we would chat on the bench. And it was quite a big 
deal. 
 
So shortly after my election in April of 2016, you know, to my 
surprise, to my major surprise, I received a card in the mail. 
And the card read: 
 

Congratulations to you on your win to the provincial 
legislature on April 4th, 2016. Obviously you had many 
voters cheering for you, for they recognize your leadership 
qualities. It will be a great experience for you and your 
family. 
 
Also, thank you from us for allowing your name to stand 
for election to your provincial legislature. Saskatchewan 
needs good people who are good leaders to represent them 
in Prince Albert Carlton, as well as the rest of the province. 
We are sure that you and your efforts will make us all 

proud. 
 
It was signed by Larry Lozinski. And Mr. Lozinski was a 
tremendous person. I mean, in our discussions, after I got the 
nom again when I was a little older, it was more than evident. 
 
I mean, you know that principal, that mean old principal when 
you’re growing up — that you’re thinking that they are — it 
turns out, you know, they’re just regular people just like you 
and I. That’s exactly what it was, and it was such an honour and 
a source of pride for me to get this letter from him after so 
many years and I was very, very pleased. 
 
Now I’ve got to return, Mr. Speaker, to my thoughts on the 
budget. And Saskatchewan is projected to have the 
fourth-highest growth in the country in 2018 and the 
third-highest in 2019, according to the private sector forecast. 
Competitive taxes and targeted incentives support continued 
diversification and growth in Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
You know, I’ve listened to some of the members opposite on 
their comments on the budget, Mr. Speaker, and I’m pretty sure 
that they weren’t listening when they went to the budget 
briefings. And I’m darned sure they never listened to the 
Finance minister when she actually made the speech here in the 
House. But you know what, I actually was, so I’ll just give them 
a few more highlights just so . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’m 
glad they’re awake over there. I was getting worried that 
everybody was dozing off. I thought I heard snoring a couple of 
times but . . . I thought I heard snoring but apparently not. It’s 
good. 
 
So a couple of the highlights: 413 million in direct support to 
municipalities and 123 million for municipal infrastructure; 
increased funding to STEP [Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership], the Saskatchewan trade and export program, to 
expand the province’s export markets; 2.7 million investment in 
infrastructure including Crown corporations to support the 
growing province; growth tax incentive to encourage 
investment, diversify the economy, and create jobs. 
 
Spending is forecast to be 1.4 per cent lower than last year’s 
budget. We saved 5 million by reducing the number of 
government-owned vehicles. 19 million in savings from 
amalgamation to one health region while improving frontline 
care. 
 
No tax increases. No tax increases. No carbon tax, Mr. Speaker. 
No carbon tax. And that’s so huge considering what members 
opposite are projecting, that job-killing $4 billion carbon tax 
they just have no problem signing onto because it would bring 
us, cost us 4 billion to get 65 million, but they have no problem. 
No tax rate increases. Low personal and corporate income tax 
remain the same. No increases to the education property tax or 
provincial sales tax rates. 
 
Record investment in health care includes universal HIV drug 
coverage, new psychiatric facility, the Saskatchewan Hospital 
in North Battleford that will be opening in the fall, and the 
Children’s Hospital in Saskatoon. New hearing loss screening 
program for babies born in Saskatchewan hospitals. 2.8 million 
for new autism individualized funding benefit. 
 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3839 

Thirty million increase in education operation funding that goes 
to the front line, Mr. Speaker, for the 2018-19 school year. 
Funding increases for foster families, caregivers, and 
community-based organizations supporting children in need of 
protection, at-risk families, and adults with intellectual 
disabilities. 
 
To keep the provincial government’s three-year plan on a 
balanced budget on track, we are investing in infrastructure to 
support safety and growth: twinning and passing lane projects 
on highways 6, 39, 4, and 7; phase 2 of the Regina bypass; 
completion of funding for Saskatoon north commuter bridge; 
4.9 million new funding to help keep rural residents safe 
through a rural crime strategy; keeping our economy strong. 
 
New tax incentives: Saskatchewan value-added agriculture and 
technology start-up to support investment, job creation, and 
productivity; incentive programs to encourage mineral 
exploration, grow and diversify our mineral sector. All 
returning to balance in ’19 and ’20. 
 
Our three-year balanced budget remains on track. Balance 
ensures long-term sustainability and continued investment in 
infrastructure, improved revenue stability, and less dependence 
on resource revenue. 
 
The third-lowest debt-to-GDP [gross domestic product] in 
Canada. I know we have some debt, Mr. Speaker, and we need 
that debt. We had to do the infrastructure. We were left with a 
massive infrastructure deficit and we had to, we had to build it. 
And with a growing province we have to invest in more 
infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. And that’s how that goes. But we 
still have the third-lowest debt-to-GDP in Canada and a strong 
AAA credit rating. 
 
Budget 2018-19 keeps Saskatchewan on track by controlling 
spending while delivering high-quality services for 
Saskatchewan people. This budget invests in people while 
keeping on track to bring this budget back to balance. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I am very proud to support the 
budget put forward by the Minister of Finance. And I will not, I 
repeat, I will not be supporting the amendment. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker, and my one fan in the back row there. You know, I 
want to start by saying thank you to Mark McLoughlin, my 
deputy minister; Tessa Ritter, my chief of staff; and Wendy 
Ward, my CA. I think together we make a pretty good team. 
And I know they’re watching with bated breath in front of their 
TVs tonight, partly because they have no life, being on my 
team. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are 49 of us on this side 
of the Assembly. And in my short time of having the privilege 
of serving in these august halls, we’ve really been through a lot. 
Since I was elected in April of 2016, we have buried two of our 
members unexpectedly. We said goodbye and hello to four 
members, which also of course means we’ve been through four 

by-elections, soon to be five. Two members have been battling 
cancer. One member has had a son who was critically injured. 
We’ve gone through a vigorous five-month leadership 
campaign with six candidates — two women, one Aboriginal 
person, and three men. Of course we’ve said goodbye to Brad 
Wall, whose brand will forever be imprinted on this party. 
We’ve embraced the leadership of Premier Scott Moe, who is 
already making his mark. And we’ve been faced with a horrible 
tragedy as a result of the Humboldt Broncos bus crash. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a mom who literally rushes out the door 
from here to get supper on the table and kids to sports, often 
coming back late at night to work, and sometimes catching one 
of my kids’ games in between things, the tragedy over the 
Broncos is really close to home. There are few things I love 
watching more than watching my kids compete. I’m very 
mindful, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I still have the privilege of 
doing these things while other families do not. And my heart 
goes out to them. A 16-year-old should never be a pallbearer for 
another 16-year-old friend, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The trajectory 
there is just so, so wrong. 
 
All of this would have fractured even the strongest party, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. But I’ve come to know that I’m truly 
surrounded by some incredible people. Members of the public 
unfortunately only get a very small glimpse of the depth of 
character and talent that we have on these benches and I really 
want them to know about it. 
 
I’m constantly inspired by the member from Martensville, the 
member from Meadow Lake, and the member from Indian Head 
— all of whom are astute political minds. 
 
I’m always in awe of the steadfast commitment and pride in 
their constituency that the member from The Battlefords, the 
member from Cut Knife-Turtleford, the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats, and the member from Regina Pasqua have. 
 
The member from Saskatchewan Rivers, the member from 
Saskatoon Westview, the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, 
and the member from Yorkton hold our heartbeat, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, along with the Speaker. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Stonebridge is one of the most 
eloquent speakers in our benches although may have some 
competition from the new member from Swift Current. And our 
Finance minister by far is the most fearless. I admire the 
historical memory of the member from Cannington and the 
steadiness in everything they do from the members from 
Rosetown, Saskatoon northeast, and Lumsden-Morse. 
 
[20:30] 
 
The member from Saskatoon Willowgrove is an incredible 
organizer, while the member from Prince Albert Carlton is a 
gentleman in the most true sense of the word. The member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy is one of our sharpest minds, while the 
member from Moosomin is our global citizen. The members 
from Estevan and Lloydminster nurture us. 
 
I want to point these things out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I 
count myself as privileged to be a part of a great team. I have 
the fortune in this life of never having done a job I hated. I’ve 



3840 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

always really enjoyed my work, and this place is no exception, 
but it is, I think, extraordinary. Not only have I aspired to adopt 
many of the incredible gifts my colleagues in this place have, 
but I’ve also never laughed so much. 
 
There is a sign in my office upstairs that says, “If you’re not 
having fun, you’re on the wrong team.” Politics is very 
rewarding but can also be very tough sometimes, and given all 
we’ve gone through as a party, I want to especially thank the 
humour and good grace of the member from Wood River who 
always has a smile. Now he’s not even paying attention, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. The pranks from the member of Saskatoon 
Southeast, and of course my seatmate, the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland, you make coming to work every day 
even better, and I thank you for that. 
 
With such a large number of members, I know I haven’t gotten 
to everyone. I only have so much time, and I want to get to the 
budget. But every single person here contributes something 
special to this team, and that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is why it 
works. 
 
And as I’ve been thinking about this, I’ve realized that what 
makes our Premier special is that he embodies I think all of 
these things — compassion and empathy, political acumen, 
policy intellect, passion, and a good sense of humour. I think of 
him as not only a leader and a mentor, but as a friend. And I’m 
really excited to be a part of this next chapter under his 
leadership because we’re going to do great things in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now on to the issue at hand, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You know, 
it’s interesting. Last year in my reply to the budget speech, I 
pointed out the fundamental inconsistencies in the opposition’s 
critique of the budget. Those logical inconsistencies were that 
they simultaneously criticized debt, deficit, and investment in 
people. Last year I asked, which is it? And here we are again 
this year. 
 
The opposition critic said, and I quote, “There is no plan in this 
budget. This government needed to make wise investments in 
Saskatchewan people to get our province back on track,” and 
then moments later talks about debt and deficit levels. I don’t 
know how anyone is supposed to take them seriously when 
their ability to construct a cohesive and very elementary 
economic argument is so obviously constrained. 
 
I am confident that our government is on track to delivering on 
our three-year plan to get back to balance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
but it seems that the opposition is also on track to staying in 
opposition. 
 
I could go on at length, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about investments 
in vulnerable people in this budget, the same targeted 
investments that have been criticized by the NDP for not doing 
enough. As my colleague, the Minister of Health, pointed out, 
many of the targeted investments we are making are precisely to 
help people avoid falling through the cracks. Investments into 
HIV, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is one of those. 
 
But near and dear to me are the investments in kids that help 
prevent them from coming into our child welfare system. These 
include supports for autism, and as the Minister of Health 

pointed out in his speech, investments into early screening and 
hearing detection for newborns. I would add that the 
investments this government has made into those who suffer 
from full or partial vision loss and the range of disability 
supports in general, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are thoughtfully 
delivered to ensure a strong quality of life in this province for 
some of our most vulnerable people. 
 
On advanced education, the member from Saskatoon Nutana 
said, and I quote, “There’s little hope offered in this budget for 
post-secondary students in Saskatchewan as well.” As I will 
shortly lay out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I beg to differ. 
 
And perhaps the most egregious comments are these, and I 
quote: “We also looked for but did not find any inspiration in 
this budget,” Mr. Deputy Speaker: “inspiration for 
entrepreneurship . . . inspiration for bright young minds. The 
addition of so-called incentives in areas like value-added 
agriculture and for start-up businesses are all good and fine,” 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
She then goes on with this, and I quote, “This government had 
an opportunity to inspire today’s and next generations of 
inventors and entrepreneurs but they’ve missed it.” 
 
“Now what they did include,” Mr. Deputy Speaker, “which 
perhaps speaks to this government’s notion of inspiration but I 
would venture no one else’s, are confusing, ill-conceived, and 
overly complex new programs . . . which will impact a very 
limited number of applicants.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the growing and young tech 
community in our province would be very interested to know 
that this is the NDP’s view. I think the many, many young 
people who I talk to that don’t want to punch a clock in their 
future but want to be masters of their own destiny and become 
entrepreneurs would be very, very interested in the NDP’s view. 
And I think our existing entrepreneurial community would also 
be very interested in knowing that this is their view. 
 
Saskatoon, the opposition critic’s home city, is the 
second-fastest-growing tech hub in Canada outside the 
Kitchener-Waterloo area. This means our province is uniquely 
positioned in Western Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we are a major exporter of resources, resources that the 
world wants. So if you take the combination of the STSI 
[Saskatchewan technology start-up incentive] and the 
Saskatchewan value-added agricultural incentive, we have a 
potent combination — the kind of potent combination that 
produces the kind of work that Ag-West Bio is doing or Trent at 
SeedMaster is doing with autonomous tractors. 
 
You see, just because the NDP doesn’t understand a growth 
incentive like the Saskatchewan tech start-up incentive doesn’t 
mean it is, and I quote, “no one else’s inspiration.” And to go 
on to refer to it as ill-conceived flies in the face of the many, 
many entrepreneurs through the leadership of Co.Labs and 
SaskTech, who pushed hard for this. 
 
There really is nothing complex or ill-conceived about the 
STSI, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is pretty straightforward in fact. 
We’re providing a 45 per cent tax incentive, which is designed 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3841 

to address the shortage of capital for early-stage start-ups. Of 
importance, eligible start-ups must be in Saskatchewan and half 
their employees need to be located in the province. It is a 
two-year pilot using funds we already have in Innovation 
Saskatchewan. This helps us create an important pathway, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and it is a pathway towards further economic 
diversification, innovation, and growth. 
 
That pathway is actually well paved through a number of 
significant and thoughtful policy choices we have made. We 
start with the introduction of coding in the K to 12 curriculum. 
Then in the post-secondary sector, we expand computer science 
seats and spur an entrepreneurial research culture by leveraging 
the Saskatchewan advantage innovation funding that we have. 
Twenty projects, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have been funded 
through this program, which have in turn attracted 27 million in 
private investment, almost 2 million in federal investment, and 
just over 8 million of our own investment. The total return on 
investment on the basis of the funds that we’ve leveraged, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is 258 per cent — 258 per cent. 
 
Then we have the patent box legislation, which helps our 
research community patent and commercialize the products of 
their work to help build the knowledge economy. And now we 
also have the STSI, which helps early-stage start-ups access 
capital right here at home. You see, Saskatchewan was the only 
jurisdiction that didn’t have a start-up incentive like this, and so 
we lost and were at risk of losing more young people who 
simply pursued their entrepreneurial dreams elsewhere because 
accessing angel investment was more attractive elsewhere. 
We’ve changed that because we want our young people to grow 
and thrive right here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The member opposite from Saskatoon Riversdale argued in her 
speech that we’ve ignored female entrepreneurs, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Well about a third of the entrepreneurs in this province 
are female. Seven of the 37 companies that have gone through 
the Co.Labs Incubator have had female founders. Contango 
Strategies, one of those initiatives that we have funded through 
the Saskatchewan Advantage Fund for Innovation, is led by two 
female founders who do the important work of using 
technological applications to help clean up water at mine sites 
and around the world. 
 
And let’s take it a step further to include RoboYou, a program 
which is introducing robotics and coding to First Nations 
students on two reserves here in the province of Saskatchewan 
so that those students can be part of the third wave of 
technology opportunities in this province. There’s no doubt we 
have more work to do, but these are moves in the right 
direction, and we’re going to keep going. If that is not trusting 
to provide hope and inspiration, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t 
know what is. 
 
And it’s just one more example of the lack of serious, 
thoughtful reflection on behalf of the members opposite. You 
can’t just shoot randomly at everything in sight, hoping you’ll 
hit a target, if you want to be considered the government in 
waiting, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Our investment into this particular pathway around technology 
and growing our entrepreneurial ecosystem, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is inspiring and exciting. We are living in an age 

where our use of the digital world means we’re contributing to 
data, the accumulation of data in real time. Every single time 
we like a post, conduct a search, share a photo, or make an 
online purchase, we’re contributing to a data profile. Our kids 
are going to have a lifetime of this, and it’ll allow for 
longitudinal research the likes of which we’ve never, ever 
before seen. 
 
Now there are certain risks to privacy associated with this as 
we’re seeing in the United States, but there are also great 
opportunities for us to harness both macro and micro data in 
real time in order to make better decisions as a government 
about the interventions that actually work to help people and 
grow our economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is work that 
we’re undertaking right now in the government under the 
leadership of Dale McFee. 
 
As a global exporter, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Internet can 
literally become a shared language. Right now I could travel 
anywhere in the world and converse because I can type a phrase 
into Google Translate on my phone, which can spit that phrase 
out in 90 languages as fast as any connection speed will allow, 
which is all part of the growth of voice-based virtual assistants. 
 
The growth of mobile apps alone, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has 
been phenomenal. There are billions of smartphone users in the 
world and on average, each of these has 28 to 32 apps on their 
phone. Those apps have been created by computer coders, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The growth in as-a-service business models, like locally owned 
Best Food Forward or Local & Fresh, enable local food 
subscription services that effectively build an end-to-end supply 
chain, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And there is, despite the opposition 
critic’s charge that we have nothing on renewables and 
sustainabilities, a lot of entrepreneurial movement in the 
circular economy. 
 
Just look at the work that Saskatchewan-based Cleanfarms is 
doing around grain bag recycling — work that has been made 
possible in part by funding from the Ministry of Agriculture — 
or about the very exciting opportunities to collaborate and 
innovate that the protein supercluster will bring. 
 
I am so very proud to be part of a party on this side of the 
Assembly who has a very thoughtful plan on how to manage 
our economy and continue to grow for the next generation of 
Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
We aren’t going to just lead, Mr. Deputy Speaker; we’re going 
to thrive, and I’m really excited to play my part in it. And for all 
of these reasons, I am very proud to support this budget and the 
work of our extraordinary Finance minister and her team, and I 
will not be supporting the amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
As ever, it’s good to take my place in this Assembly that’s been 
entrusted to me by the people of Regina Elphinstone-Centre, 
and to have a few words to say in this debate on the budget 
motion. 



3842 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

Now it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the rhetoric that 
gets deployed every year for the budget, certainly that “on 
track” was chosen as the theme for this budget. I’ll have more 
to comment upon, but first, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to start with 
some words of congratulations and condolence and thanks. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, too, as many members in this place 
have said, we stand here in the midst of tragedy. We stand here 
carrying out the people’s business as funerals are taking place, 
and as life-and-death struggles are being fought in hospitals, 
Mr. Speaker. We set about the people’s business here in this 
Chamber as moms, as dads, as siblings, as children are 
returning home where there are dinner tables that won’t see 
people coming home anymore. And that, as has been said, the 
kind of heartbreak that’s involved in that, Mr. Speaker, is 
horrible to behold. And I just want to add my voice to those 
extending condolence, extending prayers and wishes for better 
days to come, Mr. Speaker, for those that have been right there 
in the jaws of this tragedy. 
 
[20:45] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know that there’s certainly been others 
speak much more eloquently on this score than I, but 
everyone’s got a connection into this tragedy in this province. 
And it’s a horrible thing to behold, but the resilience, the 
determination, the courage, and that ever-stronger light in the 
darkness that comes from Humboldt to light right across the 
globe, Mr. Speaker, is an amazing thing to behold as well. And 
I won’t belabour the point any longer than that. 
 
I know that there’s some things in life that you get through but 
you never get over. And I know there are a lot of people in this 
Chamber that know that dynamic all too well. But they show up 
here and they carry on. And I think it was a wonderful thing 
that the SJHL [Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League] 
championships are under way, and we wish them all the best in 
that. We wish the families and the communities and those that 
were there on the front lines of that tragedy, in terms of health 
care professionals, Mr. Speaker, we wish them all nothing but 
strength and grace and continued courage in the days and years 
to come. And again that you might get through something like 
this, but you never get over it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in the spirit of, again, those that have 
persevered in the face of this tragedy, that have set about 
discharging their responsibilities, I too will carry on in my 
speech and continue to try and do my part as we set about the 
people’s business in this Legislative Assembly for the great 
province of Saskatchewan, and try to do my part in terms of 
living up to the trust that has been extended to me by my friends 
and neighbours in Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in doing that work, I want to say a few 
words of congratulations. Again, this speech being a time when 
you are able to incorporate some of these broader things into the 
speech, my list of bouquets will not be as extensive as the 
member’s from Regina University, but I do want to say a word 
of congratulations . . . There are a number of self-nominators in 
the room tonight, Mr. Speaker. It’s good to see the hands going 
up. But I do want to say a word of congratulations, certainly. 
 
I want to say some thanks to our outgoing Speaker for the work 

that he’d done to help us in the pursuit of the people’s business. 
I want to say thanks to all those that put their names forward to 
seek that role out. 
 
I want to say a special word of thanks to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, for the work that you continue to do on our behalf. 
Again, I haven’t been here forever, but I’ve been here for a 
while and I’ve seen some things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And you 
know, I think after seeing some small part of yourself serving as 
the Chair for the Human Services Committee for bills 5 and 6, 
early on in the life of the then-new Wall government, I thought 
that was like a lifetime achievement award in the offing right 
there. But anyway, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thank you for the 
work that you continue to do. 
 
I congratulate our new Speaker and wish him well in gainsaying 
the rights and responsibilities of we, the members, as we set out 
to do the people’s business. 
 
I want to say a word of congratulations to the new members 
from Melfort, from Kindersley, and from Swift Current. I’m 
also looking to Swift Current for updates on the . . . We’ve got a 
score coming in: 4 to 0, 4 to 0. It’s looking good for the Swift 
Current Broncos. I had a bit of side bet going on this game, Mr. 
Speaker. I thought maybe this one they’d pick to go into 
quadruple overtime, but not to be. 
 
But in seriousness, Mr. Speaker, congratulations to those 
members as they take their place and as they set about serving 
their constituents. And may they bring honour and results for 
the people that sent them to this Assembly. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, in . . . You know, it’s always a good time 
to be thankful, and I certainly have a lot to be thankful about in 
my life in terms of the people that I work with and in terms of 
the strength and love and the nurturing that I draw from family 
and friends. And, Mr. Speaker, I am so thankful for the 
tremendous amount of help that is given to me because I’m not 
an easy case to deal with, Mr. Speaker, and I could extend that 
certainly to my caucus colleagues. 
 
And I guess this is a good a point as any to say congratulations 
to those that undertook leadership on the other side of the aisle. 
We’ve got a new Deputy Premier. He’s looking well rested. I 
don’t know what’s going on over there. Marked, marked 
improvement over the old Deputy Premier, Mr. Speaker . . . But 
you can tell there’s such a thing as being too truthful in politics 
sometimes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But seriously, Mr. Speaker, in truth, congratulations to the new 
Premier, the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook, and we wish 
him well in that job. We wish him many successes but not of 
course after the next election. But anyway, Mr. Speaker, we 
wish all members well as they figure out where the handle is 
and all the new jobs that go on over there. 
 
But as well, Mr. Speaker, on our side of the House we’ve 
undertaken a leadership . We had a vigorous contest. The 
member from Saskatoon Meewasin emerged as the leader, and I 
congratulate him in that and wish him well in terms of bringing 
what he has to offer the people of Saskatchewan to bear. And I 
wish him wisdom and forbearance and patience certainly, Mr. 
Speaker, in that important job as the Leader of Her Majesty’s 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3843 

Loyal Opposition. And again I wish him success in that work, 
but I wish certainly continued success and on to bigger and 
better things. But that of course is for the people to decide. 
 
And we’re here tonight, and it may surprise you to know, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that we’re here to debate the budget. Now I 
guess I’m glad that we’re here to debate a budget, because 
certainly two years ago at this time — or, you know, two years 
plus a couple of weeks — we had undertaken a provincial 
election where the people of Saskatchewan were not afforded 
that full look at the books that comes with a budget, Mr. 
Speaker. And certainly, you know, I would submit that in terms 
of what was put forward by members opposite in terms of that 
campaign, it wasn’t the full bill of goods, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I guess a lot of the chickens come home to roost in last 
year’s budget. Which I was interested to hear the member from 
Regina University go on about the virtues of that budget, Mr. 
Speaker, because if memory serves, that was a budget that saw 
that member playing host to a rally that took place outside of 
her constituency office, where hundreds of people came 
forward to say that what that government was doing around 
libraries was absolutely wrong, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 
think she had said something to the effect of, you know, there 
were going to be some of those members not coming back. 
 
And I’m glad to see, Mr. Speaker, that that was changed in this 
year’s budget. I was glad to see they retreated in disarray from 
that particular measure last year, Mr. Speaker, and I’m glad to 
see that that’s been made whole in this year’s budget. But again, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not like people have very short memories. 
People remember these things around the province. And again 
in terms of measures in this year’s budget and it’s again, you 
know, this is not to say that there aren’t good things in this 
budget. And certainly there are good things in this budget, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And I’ll get to some of those as we go along 
here. 
 
But I think of things like the . . . Well to start, for a budget that 
is supposedly on track, you know, there’s been a lot of talk in 
the last few days about thanks for the public servants and all the 
work that they do. And of course last year, Mr. Speaker, they 
had those public servants lined up for a $250 million wage cut. 
They wanted to take 3.5 per cent off it and, you know, it wasn’t 
sure if there were going to be Wallidays or if they were going to 
take it off the top or how that was going to be done. And it was 
something that you could question it for hours on end in 
committee, Mr. Speaker, but they never came forward with a 
good answer. 
 
And so this year of course they’ve retreated from that and 
they’re moving instead to eliminate $70 million of expenditure 
over two years, $35 million a year — 15 million out of the 
public service, and 20 million out of the Crown sector. And 
again, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be interested to see how that is 
accomplished given the lack of answers that were forthcoming 
around questions we had about the quarter of a billion dollars 
that they’re going to take out of the public service. Whereas 
instead, what’s the point in the division between the public 
service and the Crown sector because of course the Crown 
sector . . . 
 
And you can see it in their documents, Mr. Speaker, in terms of, 

oh, the net income that they’re counting on — the Auto Fund, 
SGI, SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority], 
SaskPower Corporation, SaskTel, SaskEnergy — the dollars 
that this government is counting on those entities to underwrite 
their budget, Mr. Speaker. And some of them in the face of, you 
know, sending those very corporations out to do . . . pass 
legislation to increase their borrowing limits, Mr. Speaker, so 
that those entities can borrow money to meet in part the 
increased revenue expectations that this government has to 
underwrite their budget. 
 
So is that an on-track thing, Mr. Speaker? Is that on track to add 
more debt to the Crowns and add to the debt picture that has us 
at $20 billion and rising? I would submit so is that in the case of 
SaskPower, where arguably we’re already paying a carbon tax. 
So you know, they can jack themselves up all they like on that 
score, Mr. Speaker, but in terms of what’s happened around 
carbon capture and storage and the way that that cost has been 
passed onto the ratepayer, Mr. Speaker, that’s already in the 
mix. 
 
And again they can tilt at Trudeau all they like, Mr. Speaker, 
but I guess that beats having to look in the mirror and say, you 
know, what have our bad choices resulted in in terms of costs 
being passed on to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
[21:00] 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of this budget being on track, 
well we’ll believe it when we see it because of course, you 
know . . . And even when you don’t see it, the way that this 
government’s hid from the budget, kept that under the table, 
and then bluffed their way through an election. Again people, 
you know, they’ve got busy lives, they’ve got a lot of things to 
take care of, but the people will not be fooled and the truth will 
come out, Mr. Speaker. People will understand these things for 
what they are. 
 
So again I think back to the libraries last year. And we had a lot 
of great lectures coming from members opposite about how this 
was a modernizing move and how this was something that 
needed to take place to, I don’t know, that the digital age was 
overtaking us and that there’s no place for libraries anymore. 
And of course the people weren’t buying that, and so they had 
to dismount and here we are again today, Mr. Speaker. Or I 
think of the $54 million that were cut from classrooms. And of 
course that’s presented as the $30 million to come in this year’s 
budget. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, there are good things happening in the 
K to 12 education budget in this province. And I was certainly 
glad to be there for the grand opening of the gym. I thought the 
Minister of Education gave a fine speech on that day. And it 
was a joyous day for the community because there at Sacred 
Heart Community School in the heart of north central Regina is 
a school with 450-plus students, two-thirds to three-quarters of 
them indigenous. There are kids from around the world as part 
of that student body, Mr. Speaker. This is a school where the 
educators continually win wars for innovation and doing great 
things in the sector. 
 
I’m just trying to give the Minister of Education some props 
here, Mr. Speaker. In terms of things that I couldn’t agree more 



3844 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

with in this budget, this was one of them. It was a great day. 
They have a wonderful atrium at Sacred Heart, Mr. Speaker, 
where the assemblies are conducted. And you look up and you 
see all those kids and you think about the future for those kids 
and the way that, you know, there was such great work being 
done at the school beforehand, Mr. Speaker. And if you can 
give Saskatchewan people generally the tools, they get the job 
done. And to give these kids a first-class education at a 
first-class institution, what wonderful things they will 
accomplish. 
 
So I’ll say it again, Mr. Speaker: it was a wonderful day for the 
community. I was glad to see the way that the voice of the 
community had spoken up and spoken up forcefully and 
repeatedly, Mr. Speaker, and the way that in this circumstance 
the government responded to it and this beautiful day could 
transpire. So far be it from me, Mr. Speaker, when I see 
something right, you know, I just want to make sure that I’m 
not some braying donkey that is always against things. But I 
want to say and go on record as, you know, that was the right 
thing to do on the part of the government. And I thank the 
Minister of Education and through him the government 
generally for that wonderful day. 
 
I also want to say that there’s some great work done at the 
opening of the mâmawêyatitân centre. mâmawêyatitân is 
nēhiýaw, it’s Cree for “let’s all be together,” Mr. Speaker. And 
I know that there have been some things said in this building 
about announcements that get made over years, and certainly, 
Mr. Speaker, I was part of a government that put forward $2 
million of planning money for that very institution. And it took 
a few turns around the block coming into the final throes, Mr. 
Speaker, over a decade, over a decade. And you know, it’s 
interesting . . . Again members have talked about different of 
the problems they have with the way that the announcement 
machine gets cranked up at election time, and certainly, Mr. 
Speaker, we saw some of that go on in Elphinstone. 
 
And the bottom line, though, is this: mâmawêyatitân, let’s all be 
together, and the shared facility that is Scott Collegiate, and the 
way that those kids have a first-class high school to go to, that 
. . . It’s partnered in with Albert library. It’s partnered in with 
the community centre. You know, would that the health 
component had been part of that project, but that day is going to 
come, Mr. Speaker. But the way that the community and the 
different partners rallied together to make sure that that project 
stayed on track and finally came into being, and that those 
students have a first-rate high school to go to, it’s a wonderful 
thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we look forward to many continued successes from those 
students, and again from . . . I think of people like Principal 
Shannon Fayant and her staff and the folks that are there day in, 
day out and deal with challenges that are maybe not part of the 
mix in a lot of other places in this province, Mr. Speaker, but 
the way that they bring so much love and dedication to bear, I 
think this is an institution that is going to make a tremendous 
impact on my home community of North Central. And we wish 
nothing but success for mâmawêyatitân, again in nēhiýaw, 
“let’s all be together.” It’s a great thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there are good things happening in the budget. I don’t know 
if I’ve made that clear. But there are some other things that, on 

balance . . . And it’s always a balancing act; you try and sift 
these things through, Mr. Speaker. And you try to wonder how 
a smart, committed public servant like the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest could buy in for the whole package but, 
you know, there they are, buying in for the whole package. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what’s to come for the days 
ahead, I guess I’d start off with a little matter in the lead-up to 
the 2007 election. This is a government that promised to be the 
most open and accountable government in the history of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. You know any time the rhetoric 
gets that overblown in politics, Mr. Speaker, I’d suggest you 
should check your wallet. I’d suggest you should check the 
record. I suggest you should check what’s actually happening.  
 
Because, of course, what has this most open and accountable 
government afforded us in this budget, Mr. Speaker? Well to 
start with, in the budget briefing, you know, the first move was 
to say, hey we’ve never provided copies of the budget in the 
budget technical briefing. And of course, Mr. Speaker, it took 
some back and forth, and then we finally got copies of the 
budget because that’s always been part of the mix. You sign 
your embargo; you get a copy of the budget. Sometimes there’s 
some turns on the road there but anyway, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
the way it works. 
 
And then the next thing you notice when you get a copy of the 
budget is, well I’ll be darned, one of the big initiatives for this 
budget is what’s happening with the public service. The 
full-time equivalents that are, you know, that have been 
traditionally listed as part of each line department estimate in 
the Estimates book, where the rubber hits the road, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of expenditure and the various 
sub-departments and what’s the full-time equivalent public 
service component that’s attached to that particular ministry. 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, for the most open and accountable 
government in the history of Saskatchewan, well this is the first 
year, the first year that they’ve taken that vital piece of 
information out of the budget Estimates book, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well you know, I don’t think it was like . . . When you make a 
promise like we’re going to be the most open and accountable 
government in the history of Saskatchewan, it’s not like . . . 
There isn’t some kind of asterisk where you can claim reverse 
day or, you know, we really meant the exact opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. So again for a budget where you’d think the public 
service is coming in for a significant amount of the heavy lifting 
to get this budget down the road, you’d think that it’d be a 
funny one to pick for the first time they’ve taken the full-time 
equivalent component out of the budget estimates, Mr. Speaker. 
But there it was. There it was. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, we were afterwards provided a single 
sheet of paper listing the full-time equivalents, you know, 
ministry by ministry. And you know, that’s information that’s 
usually been in the budget. So again, Mr. Speaker, what have 
they got to hide? Why do they want to make us so suspicious 
like this? 
 
Something else, Mr. Speaker. I think about the . . . One of the 
balloons that they floated before the budget was the Minister for 
Central Services talked about how there were 660 government 
properties that, you know, that was (a) too many; and that (b) 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3845 

make him an offer. And again, Mr. Speaker, you know, we’d 
like to know what the rationale is for that. We’d like to know 
what the list is, for one, which is information that should be 
readily available. But of course when we ask the question in 
here, that information isn’t provided. When we ask the written 
question, it’s ordered so they can sit on it for six months. So 
again, I don’t know if the Deputy Premier’s got the memo over 
there, but if he’s got the list, send it over. You know, we’re 
interested. These are the people’s assets. So like, get with the 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these 660 assets that, you know, were rhymed off 
as too many, again, maybe there’s a rationale there. It’s not like 
these things are written in stone, but it leads into broader 
questions, like what’s happening with the sound stage. And 
again the sound stage, which was critical infrastructure for a 
once-thriving film industry here in the province of 
Saskatchewan that . . . You know, this government saw fit to 
put a stake through the heart of that industry. It’s a shadow of 
what it once was. But you know, if that industry is going to 
revive, it counts on the sound stage. 
 
And so that the sound stage was brought forward as an example 
of this part of this 660 list, Mr. Speaker, caused a lot of concern 
for a lot of people, both in and out of the province, that look 
forward to a day when the film industry perhaps will be 
revived, will perhaps regain its former glory and add jobs, add 
value, add revenues to the province of Saskatchewan. They look 
forward to that day, Mr. Speaker. But you know, they couldn’t 
get a straight answer from the minister on what’s even the 660 
list, let alone what’s going to happen to the sound stage, which 
has already been reviewed by government, Mr. Speaker. And 
they talked to hundreds of people in the process of that review. 
 
We look at other decisions the government’s made, Mr. 
Speaker. I think of the takeover of Wascana Centre, the way 
that that partnership, which extends back decades to the ’60s, 
Mr. Speaker — there had been a tripartite arrangement between 
the university, the city of Regina, and the provincial 
government — again when that took place, there was a lot of 
speculation, and some of it by people that ran for that party to 
seek office, Mr. Speaker, as to what that would mean in terms 
of large-scale, wholesale commercialization in the park. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, you look at this and you think, okay, 
so cash-strapped government in desperate fiscal straits plus 
public assets, you know, how could this possibly go wrong? 
You know, what do you think’s going to happen here? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve already seen one case where there’s a 
project that’s nearly five times the size of the envelope that’s 
been green-lit, and we’ll see what else is to come in terms of the 
way that this government is exercising its new-found, newly 
assumed control over Wascana Centre, Mr. Speaker. And I tell 
you what, people in Regina very much value that park. And I 
don’t think it’s a mistake, Mr. Speaker, that there is a Saskatoon 
MLA that was put in charge of that proposition, removing a 
Regina member from that circumstance. You know, how does 
that add up? 
 
So we’ll see. We’ll be watching very closely, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of what the immediate future will bring around the fire 
sale of public assets, and in this case as it regards the jewel of 

the crown in the Queen City, Mr. Speaker, Wascana Park. And 
again, these are things, these are moves that this government 
didn’t campaign on, didn’t ask the people for a mandate. They 
just went ahead and bowled their way forward. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on these and on other fronts — again in terms 
of the different sort of lectures that we’ve been subjected to 
over the years by members of this government about things that 
they said were great, that were world class and leading this 
nation, and so on and so forth — I think of what’s happened 
with the GTH, Mr. Speaker, and the way that that has been, you 
know, alternately defended and then sort of hidden by members 
opposite in terms of what the public documents that come 
forward have to say in terms of what the selective reading of the 
different assessments that have gone on, Mr. Speaker, the way 
that there is differing opinions on a public inquiry, Mr. Speaker, 
in terms of what happened at the GTH and how we as the 
people of Saskatchewan can find out what truly happened there. 
And again, Mr. Speaker, that is an account to be reckoned, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s an account to be reconciled. 
 
[21:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think also about what’s happening on the front of 
reconciliation. And again in terms of the future for indigenous 
Saskatchewan, their success is Saskatchewan’s success, Mr. 
Speaker. And as long as we have, you know, an employment 
situation where you have 20 per cent unemployment for First 
Nations and you don’t even count what’s happening on-reserve, 
Mr. Speaker, where we know for a fact that the situation is 
much worse, Saskatchewan will suffer accordingly.  
 
As long as you have disparity between the way that tuition on 
reserve has a disparity for that off reserve, you’ll continue to 
have Saskatchewan suffer. As long as you have a child welfare 
system where the support that is on offer is not there in an 
equitable and fair way that has been again argued and 
adjudicated many times in the recent past, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
going to see Saskatchewan not live up to its full potential. So 
these are things where, you know, in the terms of the broad 
work of reconciliation, Mr. Speaker, there’s so much work to be 
done. 
 
And I think about again, some of the members have touched on 
this, education is one of these great levellers that we have in 
society. And as long as you take $54 million out of the 
classroom, put 30 million back, and expect to have a party 
thrown for you, Mr. Speaker, it’s a bit of a magic act. And I 
know the member from Saskatoon Northwest is a charming 
guy, but in terms of even keeping up with inflation, Mr. 
Speaker, I know his math’s better than that. I know that he 
knows there’s still a shortfall out there. 
 
So again I think Saskatchewan people are giving that new 
Minister of Education a fair shot. And I think he benefits from 
some of the past comparisons, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 
various charm offensives that have been launched by that 
government out into the classrooms. But, Mr. Speaker, the math 
will not be denied. The fact of the matter is that this 
government, I don’t care what new math they’re bringing in 
with the curriculum, you know, 54 minus 30 does not equal 
good times in the classroom. There are front lines that suffer in 
the classroom. And in terms of what’s happening with inflation, 



3846 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

again the member knows this. The minister knows this. Would 
that he was part of a government that knows this, Mr. Speaker, 
and instead would look to their own mistakes, their own costly 
boondoggles to make up the shortfall in their budgets, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I guess the last topic that I’d like to touch on, Mr. Speaker, is 
what’s happening with the rental supplement. And again, you 
know, we’ve come through a budget last year where the then 
minister of Social Services had to preside over so many 
heartless cuts in that package that she had to protest that she has 
a heart. Like it’s quite the thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And many, many of those cuts were indeed heartless. And 
sometimes collective government is a harsh thing. And 
sometimes you as a cabinet minister get to have a choice as to, 
are you going to go out and carry the line or are you going to 
resign? And that minister chose to carry on, and fair enough. 
But in terms of the people that that government sought to take 
the money out of, it makes you question the values of that 
government, Mr. Speaker. And in terms of what’s happening 
now with the rental supplement, where you’re going to take the 
rental supplement out of the equation without having something 
there for folks to land on, folks that are already in some of the 
most straitened circumstances of anyone in Saskatchewan . . . 
 
And I guess this is a good place as well to say, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to say thank you very much to the Minister of Social 
Services. And I want to say thank you to his staff, his 
hard-working staff, Mr. Speaker. Because out of Elphinstone, 
we deal with that minister’s office probably on the order of 
once a day, and often it’s not already on questions that have to 
do with the rental supplement. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in terms of how things are working with that 
government . . . And the minister referenced this earlier on, 
where there are a tremendous number of vacancies in Regina 
housing units. And again, this is a question that we’d asked the 
government and they ordered it, Mr. Speaker. They ordered it 
so they could sit on it for another six months in terms of where 
those vacancies are. Now we don’t know why that is but, you 
know, in terms of that information being part of the deliberative 
process that is this Assembly, it would be helpful information to 
have before the people’s representatives. 
 
But in terms of the rental supplement itself, that they want to 
take $5 million out of a circumstance and offer up some 
yet-to-be-determined federal support that is not in place, Mr. 
Speaker, I think is going to make a tough situation for many 
people all the more harder. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, I’m thankful for all the great work that 
gets done, and I’m thankful for the commitment to improving 
people’s lives. And there are other measures in that budget that 
are certainly well placed, Mr. Speaker, but this is a measure 
that, to me, has the look of the trade-offs that go on at cabinet 
time, at budget finalization time, and that are not in keeping 
with, I think, the way that people do this work. But, Mr, 
Speaker, mark my words, this is going to make a tough situation 
all the more tough for folks who have it tough as it is. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I could go on even longer, but I know 
that others want to take part in this debate, and I certainly 

wouldn’t want to stand in the way of that. But, Mr. Speaker, 
again you balance these things out. You know, there can be 
good things in a package. But this is a confidence measure in 
the life of this government. And this particular government, Mr. 
Speaker, I would submit, gained its mandates by not being 
totally square with the people of Saskatchewan and hiding their 
budget circumstance. And we keep finding out more and more 
about what the books really look like as time goes on. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, for that and other reasons, I’ll certainly be 
supporting the amendment put forward by the member from 
Nutana, and I’ll be voting against this budget. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
start off with a couple of thank yous. I’d like to thank my 
family back home: Jacob and James and my wife, Danielle. It’s 
been a busy couple of months, and Danielle has just been a rock 
star in making it all possible. So thank you so much. 
 
Carrying on the thank yous, I think we need to thank the Pages 
that are in here today. They do a heck of a job. I’d like to thank 
Hansard as well for making sure everything’s recorded properly 
and the good work that Hansard does. I don’t want to miss 
anyone here. Ross, thank you so much for keeping us safe and 
for everyone in security. To Kathy and Iris, thank you so much 
for the Clerks for making sure things are run properly. 
 
To our member from North Battleford for his never-give-up 
attitude, and then the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford 
probably should give up. We . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, 
she was thanked. And then our good member from 
Canora-Pelly, just a fantastic person and a great cook and a 
good friend. And I’m so happy that I got to know him a little bit 
since he got elected. 
 
And we have three new friends from Swift Current, from 
Melfort, and from Kindersley. Just great individuals, and 
they’re the future of our party and of our government. We’re in 
good hands. Make sure I don’t forget anyone to thank. 
Saskatoon University, which is a . . . That’s a stout, very . . . 
person. Eric is someone that is — oh, sorry — the Saskatoon 
University member is just a gem of an individual. And that’s I 
think all the thank yous that I needed to do here. 
 
Oh, to Regina Elphinstone, thank you so much. When I was in 
the role of Speaker, we’ve had lots of good conversations. And 
I still owe you a free dinner because I ruled against you on the 
spot. And afterwards, after reflection I knew, and I shared this 
with him, that I erred in judgment, and I still owe you that 
dinner. So I think that’s everybody in here. 
 
I believe there is another member who was a little bit maybe 
unserious thanking people. She thanked everyone else here but 
those members, I think. All kidding aside, let’s talk about the 
budget, which is fabulous . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I burn 
bridges. From the member from Sutherland, he should know 
that, and I remember what you did. 
 
So we get to this budget. The best way to, you know, analyze a 
budget is look at the different lenses. And for me the lenses that 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3847 

I put through this budget is one for our retirees, our seniors in 
the province. And that lens I put on it is through my parents. 
What’s in here for my parents? 
 
And before I get into how I think they’re viewing this budget, I 
think I’d like to make an announcement about my father 
actually, which some of you probably knew that he has been 
fighting cancer for the last year. And he went through chemo, 
and then after Christmas he actually fell and busted his leg. 
Emergency ambulance to Regina, and thankfully great people at 
Regina General put him back together. He stopped his chemo 
treatments for three months, and just last week we found out 
he’s cancer free. 
 
So a little bit of bright news on such a gloomy province for the 
last couple of . . . since the tragic accident up in Humboldt. This 
is my first time since to rise on my feet to also share my 
condolences and thoughts and prayers with everyone that’s 
been affected by the tragedy in Humboldt. 
 
Other lenses that I would put this budget through would be the 
next generation, which would be the kids and the people of . . . 
maybe my sons, Jacob and James. So Jacob is four and James is 
three now. And those are the two lenses I think I’m going to put 
just a quick run-through of this budget and what that means for 
those two groups. 
 
So controlling spending. We’re controlling spending where 
we’re 1.4 per cent lower than last year. And why that’s 
important, I think, first off for the next generation is that we 
realize that we can’t have this reckless spending. I know in 
other provinces and even the federal government seemingly 
have forgotten the lessons of the ’90s and how reckless 
spending really put every province and the country in a terrible 
spot. Regardless of political stripe, it took tough measures to 
bring it back to balance. So I think for looking at that line item 
and looking at spending, I believe my two kids, the next 
generation, will be well served with a budget that restrains 
spending. 
 
We’re also finding savings. One of the ways that we are finding 
savings is we have reduced the number of government-owned 
vehicles. That’s over a $5 million savings annually. 
 
Another area of controlling spending is going down to one 
health region. And Health is such an important ministry for 
everyone involved. And be it for my kids, that next generation, 
or maybe more so reflective on my father who just, as I shared, 
just went through fighting and beating cancer. Well our health 
budget is now the largest it has ever been, and since 2007 the 
Cancer Agency has doubled in the support from the provincial 
government. 
 
And I’m not saying that’s why we were fortunate as a family to 
have a success story with my father beating cancer, but it’s 
something to think about, that what we’ve been able to do 
though with a decade growth is actually make those investments 
that do change people’s lives. I’m very, very thankful that 
we’ve done that. 
 
One of the important things I believe that’s not in this budget is 
a carbon tax. Mr. Speaker, every province that has brought in a 
carbon tax, their emissions have gone up. It is a ridiculous 

approach to climate change. We’ve seen it in the country of 
Australia. They introduced a carbon tax. Two years later they 
removed it. I’m very thankful that, with the direction the things 
are going nationally and with some provinces, I believe that 
we’re going to be able to stand up to Justin Trudeau’s carbon 
tax and Saskatchewan will not have a carbon tax. 
 
[21:30] 
 
When we’re comparing budgets, it’s important to look at 
choices and what other provinces have done and what have 
been the results. And I remember back probably a year ago, I 
was at a CPA [Commonwealth Parliamentary Association] 
conference and I had opportunity to sit down with an MLA that 
was from the government of Alberta NDP government. They 
brought out their budget last year and we brought out ours, and 
over dinner we were talking about the different approaches. 
And she was quite certain that the idea of keep spending and 
don’t worry about it, this is what governments should do when 
times get tough, and Alberta, you’ll see. And she made 
reference that, you know what, you guys are going on the 
wrong paths. 
 
And if you remember last budget, we controlled spending. 
There was different measures that were tough, but put us on a 
better track, a track to balance. 
 
And at the end of the dinner, we’re kind of concluding our 
discussions on which approach will be ultimately successful. 
And she asked, well there’s no way of telling, you know, if 
Saskatchewan’s on the right path or Alberta. And I turned to her 
and I said, well you’ll tell if you get re-elected at the next 
election. 
 
And it’ll be interesting. In a year and a half and a bit, Alberta’s 
going to be going to the polls and the people of Alberta will 
decide. Did the NDP government that went reckless spending in 
Alberta, that proposes a carbon tax or is bringing in a carbon 
tax, the voters in that province will have a clear distinction on 
what it would be like to have a free enterprise, right-of-centre 
party such as the Saskatchewan Party or United Conservatives 
in Alberta. 
 
And I know my esteemed member from Elphinstone talked 
about elections, and if only this came out or if only the people 
know this, and this was . . . [inaudible] . . . Well you know 
what? People in Saskatchewan will know. Saskatchewan, when 
we go to the polls in 2020, they are going to have the example 
of Alberta, of reckless spending and what comes next, because 
we’ve all lived through the ’90s where every political stripe 
overspent and it meant really tough decisions for the 
government. 
 
And I know we rail away on the NDP in Saskatchewan about 
the 52 hospitals and the 176 schools that they had to close, but 
that’s because of the reckless spending. And there is another 
analogy on that one too between the two provinces, because 
Alberta was facing very similar pressures in the ’90s as well. 
They didn’t close rural schools. They didn’t close hospitals. 
They restrained spending, and under their premier, Ralph Klein, 
did a fantastic job in bringing things back to balance — much 
quicker than Saskatchewan, mind you — without killing rural 
Saskatchewan. So think about that for a bit. The decisions they 



3848 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

made when they were in government were calculated. They 
calculated that they could write off rural Saskatchewan, close 
those hospitals, kill those towns, and it wouldn’t hurt. 
 
Now when we compare that to what Alberta did — and the 
reductions they did in Alberta were across the board — they 
didn’t close schools; they didn’t close hospitals; they didn’t kill 
rural Alberta. They looked at concrete numbers and said, you 
know what? It’s tough. We’re going to take a reduction. We’re 
taking 5 per cent . . . bang. And over time it was proven that 
they came out of the recession . . . or out of deficit quicker than 
Saskatchewan. And I believe that those are two parallel 
provinces that people will analyze going forward even after this 
set. It’s a good enough comparison as, what did Alberta do for 
the first 60 years, or what did this province do? And it will be 
shown that this party and past right-of-centre parties put this 
province on a different track, that if we would have kept on 
going, we would have been in a much better place. 
 
I’ve been informed by my Deputy House Leader that because 
other members went long, that I could cut it short. So I would 
like to thank her for making mention of that, and I’d like to put 
on the record that I will be supporting the budget and not the 
amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, 
sport, and recreation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a pleasure to join the debate this evening. My 
colleagues here, we’re coming up past 9:30, past my bedtime 
here, but we’re doing the good work of the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. So again, always a pleasure to join 
in the budget debate on behalf of the people of Regina Gardiner 
Park this evening. 
 
As several other members have done, I’d like to say a few thank 
yous. You don’t get to get on your feet too often to talk about 
these people important to you and the folks behind the scenes, 
or right at the front of the scenes, that help you out. And right at 
the front of that list of course is my family, very important to 
me. 
 
I have three sons and they’re all very busy. And my oldest son 
just started spring league football. It certainly doesn’t seem like 
spring league from years past. I was out watching a few times. I 
wasn’t able to coach this year; I’m too busy at work here. But 
it’s interesting to watch at the fields at the U of R [University of 
Regina] players going to get overthrown balls over snowbanks 
taller than they are. So that’s always an interesting sight to see. 
You lose track of them as they go over the snowbank, Mr. 
Speaker. And my other sons are . . . My middle son, Ryan, is 
involved in, coming up on three-on-three basketball. So it 
always keeps going. 
 
And of course at the front of our family and leading our family 
is my wife, Tami. She’s a nurse here with, in the province of 
Saskatchewan, I guess the new health authority. I was going to 
say Regina Qu’Appelle but that’s not the case, Mr. Speaker. 
Works outside the home but, of course, lots of work . . . Just, I 
always say, at our place, Mr. Speaker, our fridge door is open 
more than it’s closed. And just keeping that poor fridge stocked 
is a full-time job, and so that’s . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Yes, I do my fair share in there as well. It should be less on my 
part. But of course she does a great job for our family. And of 
course we’ve been married, coming up next week, 19 years. So 
the time is going quickly as we saw our family continue to grow 
and we’re very busy. 
 
And I’m very fortunate to be a Regina member. I know my 
colleagues, they’ve mentioned before, the member from 
Carlton, how he’s away from his family and that’s so very 
difficult. We all are away but we’re lucky enough, Regina 
members. Most of us get to go home in the evenings and at least 
see our family for a bit. So I commend those members that are 
away from their families for long stretches. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I appreciate my constituency assistant. Brittany 
has been with me for over five years now. It’s amazing how 
quickly the time rolls by. Speaking of my family, again, my 
oldest son’s in grade 12 but I’ve been at this job for I think over 
six years now. So the time is clicking by, that’s for sure. 
 
There’s a few members on this side that are less than six 
months into their careers, and what I’ve seen is very impressive 
so far from the members from Swift Current, Melfort, and 
Kindersley. Definitely good to have them part of our family, 
our family on the government side, and some very impressive 
wins. I think the member from Kindersley, if you took the 
results of my two elections — the victory spread in percentage 
— I think he was in excess of that in just his by-election. So 
that’s good work and I look forward to what they will bring. 
And so far it’s been very impressive. 
 
I’d also like to commend the Minister of Finance who’s served 
this province very well and certainly a very smart person and 
knows her files inside and out. And it’s a pleasure to be on 
treasury board and watching her lead that group to this budget 
that is on track, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again our government, I think . . . Well I know we have a 
plan and that plan is on track as I mentioned. One year ago we 
took some difficult decisions we had to make, Mr. Speaker. We 
knew we couldn’t just keep spending, Mr. Speaker, so we 
charted a three-year course to reduce Saskatchewan’s 
dependency on resource revenue and balance the budget by 
2019, the next budget cycle. 
 
This year’s budget keeps us on that plan, that track, by 
controlling government spending, as I mentioned previously, 
making important investments in priority areas — health care, 
social services, education — and keeping our economy strong 
through strategic investments in infrastructure and new business 
incentives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very fortunate to be the Minister of Parks, 
Culture and Sport and I think in that area of government a lot of 
the things we look at is the quality of life pieces for the people 
of the province of Saskatchewan. And like I said, I’m very 
honoured to serve in that role as the minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the folks in our office, they do great work. Paul 
and Catherine and Brier and Jill, they do good work and very 
helpful for myself, being a new member of Executive Council. 
We have a lot of folks in that office that are new to government, 
or new to the building, but they are very eager and doing good 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3849 

work on behalf of the people and certainly support me very 
much. 
 
So again the quality of life things, Mr. Speaker. Through the 
budget we’ve been able to increase our capital budget in the 
parks area, Mr. Speaker, and that, I think, definitely has helped 
over the last decade of our government. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
made a lot of investments in the parks in our province. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s several upgrades that have taken place. Over 
$100 million in the last decade has gone into our parks, Mr. 
Speaker, making a top-quality tourist destination, not only for 
people of Saskatchewan, but for people outside of 
Saskatchewan, and that helps again, as I mentioned before, 
enhance our quality of life. 
 
I think back when I was a kid, Mr. Speaker, we went camping a 
lot. I grew up in Saskatoon, and Pike Lake was a very popular 
destination for us. We spent a heck of a lot of time there. I’ve 
great memories of going fishing and, you know, just hanging 
out at the beach and riding bikes and having fun with friends at 
the parks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I hadn’t been able to do that for many years. Based on previous 
careers, it was difficult to get away in the summers. We just 
recently with my kids though, we’ve been taking day trips to 
parks around the Regina area, Rowan’s and Buffalo Pound, etc., 
Mr. Speaker, and those are definitely fun times. My son Blake 
has definitely become a fishing aficionado. He is all over 
fishing and I’m not much of a fisherman, Mr. Speaker. So again 
we’ll get out to those great parks we have in our province 
hopefully and get out and enjoy the outdoor time if we get into 
some spring-like weather here hopefully eventually, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And again with the budget in the PCS [Parks, Culture and 
Sport] area, Mr. Speaker, we talk about some of the other third 
parties that deliver programming and great art and culture for 
our province, Mr. Speaker. I think of the Arts Board. It’s the 
70th year, Mr. Speaker, the oldest art advocacy and 
grant-funding program of its kind in Canada, Mr. Speaker, and 
certainly we’re very proud of the work they do. Creative 
Saskatchewan, they do great work. 
 
I think of all the third parties that are funded through the lottery 
trust fund, through Sask Sport, SaskCulture. And Sask Park and 
Recs Association, Mr. Speaker, again funds a great quality of 
life. It’s seed money, that lottery funding, and it leverages so 
many volunteer hours and so many great folks out there that do 
great work and make our province truly what it is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[21:45] 
 
I’ll note many of those third party entities, they do great work in 
our communities of course. But with our young people, I think 
of . . . I don’t know if I’ll list them because I’ll inevitably leave 
some out, but just off the top of my head, Mr. Speaker, the 
Regina Symphony Orchestra, Globe Theatre, all sorts of 
programs within Sask Sport. They obviously have their core 
audience and they do performances, etc., but they really reach 
out to young people through workshops, through having free 
performances for classrooms right across our province. So they 
do good work and that money, I think, is well spent. And again 
so a lot of status quo in terms of the budget for PCS, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
Several of the members previous to me had talked about some 
of the important investments, some of the highlights. I’ll just 
quickly go through maybe a few of those. And again we talked 
about in the health budget how important that budget is for the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan, biggest line item in our 
province and always has . . . It’s similar to other provinces. 
 
But again we talked about the 100 per cent coverage for HIV 
drugs, investments for a new program to ensure babies born in 
Saskatchewan hospitals are screened for hearing loss. And 
again a lot of talk and a lot of debate. 2.8 million is being 
provided to fulfill the government’s commitment to provide 
individualized funding for children with autism spectrum 
disorder. Initial funding of 4,000 per child under the age of six 
will be provided this year. Very important investments in our 
people, Mr. Speaker, and also fulfills the Premier’s commitment 
to increase education funding by 30 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I note the Regina bypass again, a large part of the capital 
expenditure in the Ministry of Highways, though I disagree 
with the member from Athabasca, just to sort of brush it off and 
call it a semicircle around the city. I think it’s certainly much 
more than that. I’ve driven east of the city where a lot of that 
project is complete and it’s a very, very impressive project, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s service roads, overpasses. I’m not sure how they 
do the engineering on that. It’s an engineering marvel in my 
opinion and it’s not done yet, more to come, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’ll increase traffic, sorry, expedite traffic flow around the city 
of Regina, keep those big semis off of Victoria Avenue East in 
the heart of my constituency, Mr. Speaker. It will provide 
double-lane highway on the No. 1 and 110 kilometres so trucks 
won’t have to slow down. Well it’s so important in our province 
to get products to market efficiently and I think the biggest part 
of that entire project, and certainly on the east side of the city of 
Regina and the residents of White City, and the member from 
Wascana Plains certainly knows about it very well and talks 
about it frequently, is the safety aspect, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I remember it was very difficult to get back into the city if 
you’re coming from White City or Balgonie or Pilot Butte 
areas, Mr. Speaker. Some of those turns were long waits and 
very frustrating, not to mention very dangerous. So the bypass 
. . . but the overpasses in that area will most importantly 
improve safety, which is something that’s obviously very 
important. So it’s a little discouraging when the members 
opposite simply call it a, you know, a semicircle or dismiss it. I 
think that’s a little bit irresponsible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The budget for social service and assistance increased by 25 
million to a record 1.38 billion. Mr. Speaker, last year I heard 
the Leader of the Opposition — he gave his maiden speech in 
the Assembly — spoke a lot about social investments, and I’m 
quoting from Hansard here: 
 

The ability to rebound [he said], the ability to get back to 
work, the ability to actually succeed after that tough time is 
so much less if you cut back on social investment in 
difficult times. 

 
So he’s saying, don’t cut back, keep the money flowing for 



3850 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

people that happen to be down on their luck and maybe using 
some aspect of social services. And then what he said last year 
. . . That’s what he said last year. 
 
He commented on the budget day, on a CBC [Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation] article, and he said: 
 

They’re predicting, [I think he means us, and I go back to 
the quote] and even kind of boasting, about the highest 
social service budget in the province’s history. 
 
I don’t know how that’s something to boast about — that’s 
the most people needing social assistance in our history, 
that’s more people in poverty. 

 
So I question if that member was serious about that statement, 
Mr. Speaker. They stand up, question after question, they 
demand more spending, and then they castigate the government 
over debt. You know how the Leader of the Opposition runs. 
Part of his platform was the two-and-a-half-billion-dollar 
spending pledge every single year. Ten billion over a four-year 
government, Mr. Speaker, all including a carbon tax. 
 
Then the leader says this about our government’s record to 
invest in social services. Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure I agree with 
the Leader of the Opposition in his statements, Mr. Speaker. In 
less than a year he said, make sure you spend more. And then 
this year it’s, why are they spending more? We see that 
question after question, time after time in the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It was interesting also listening to the critic in her response to 
the budget, Mr. Speaker. Of all the things she was questioning, 
Mr. Speaker, she said she lamented that people in the province 
would have to spend PST [provincial sales tax] or have to pay 
PST on cannabis when it’s legalized, Mr. Speaker. I can think 
of a lot of things maybe that you might have a decent argument 
about in terms of maybe an exemption for this or that from 
some sort of tax, but I rarely have heard up until then that 
people are saying, man, the government would be right on track 
if they gave an exemption to cannabis for some reason. I’m not 
sure why that member would advocate for that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again the members of the opposition, they want more and more 
spending, and of course you need revenue in able to spend that, 
Mr. Speaker. So just like every other province that I’ve come 
across or listened to, their plan for cannabis includes PST. They 
want to, the members opposite want to have the government 
control the retailing and wholesaling. That’s what I’ve heard 
from them. They want to increase . . . I imagine they want to of 
course control everything. They’re interested in large 
government monopolies, the members opposite are, and part of 
the reason there is for revenue. And I imagine they’d want to 
have markups, etc. But they questioned, in the reply to the 
budget, they want to have an exemption for PST on cannabis. 
Not sure where that came from or why. Maybe we’ll hear more 
about it. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But it appears my time is running out here, Mr. Speaker. I have 
a long list of things this government has been able to 
accomplish in the last few years, Mr. Speaker. I imagine there’s 
partisan comments on each side of the House, and I appreciate 
that. That’s the business we’re in. We’re in politics and we each 

have our own opinions, obviously, maybe a little bit biased. 
 
But I’d like to just quickly get into the record, Mr. Speaker, 
what debt bond rating service said about the government’s plan 
to get back to balance. I’m going to quote here, and I’ll read 
through this quickly: 
 

The Province remains committed to the three-year plan to 
eliminate the deficit that was put forward in last year’s 
budget. That plan included immediate revenue and expense 
measures and an ongoing effort to control expenditure 
growth in subsequent years. The plan was coherent and 
credible. 

 
Those are pretty good words here. Back to quoting: 
 

As was expected, the Province was not able to achieve all 
the targeted savings outlined in last year’s plan, but the 
government has been responsive and made adjustments to 
keep the plan on track. 
 
The government continues to reiterate the importance of 
balancing the provincial budget to ensure the longer-term 
sustainability of government programs and services. 
Having demonstrated its commitment to responsible fiscal 
policy, DBRS expects the Province will be successful in 
balancing the provincial budget in 2019-20, providing 
there are no meaningful economic or fiscal disruptions. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is certainly in contrast to many other 
provinces in the country. And I also point out — a lot of 
statistics here but my time is running out — about how we 
receive no equalization. Provinces in similar size receive 
billions and billions in order to help balance their budget. We 
do not have that luxury. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this government’s on track. It’s on track to 
balance budget. It’s on track for prosperity in the future, Mr. 
Speaker. Again DBRS [Dominion Bond Rating Service Ltd.], 
we’ll take those experts in the field. We’ll take their advice 
before we take the advice of the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It’s my pleasure to again be the representative for the people of 
Regina Gardiner Park and on behalf of them I will be 
supporting the budget put forward by the Minister of Finance, 
the member from Humboldt. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m honoured 
to enter this budget debate, but before I do I want to take this 
opportunity to thank some very important people. First of all 
my mother who . . . I told her I would be on at prime time, 8 
o’clock tonight. Now I’ve been bumped to the late show, so I 
apologize for that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wanted to congratulate the Speaker on 
his appointment. He wears the hat and robe proudly, and I know 
that he’ll do a great job. It was a pleasure to have sat on the 
rural crime committee with the Speaker, and his expertise 
helped our mission immensely. 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3851 

Now that being said, the member from Canora-Pelly last week 
in his statement . . . I thought I heard something, what he said, 
but anyway I went back to Hansard and I found what he had 
said. And if only I had known that the Speaker and the member 
from Canora-Pelly were part of the rural crime problem, it may 
have reduced some of the hours spent on this very important 
issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank and recognize my 
constituency assistant, Cheryl Hume, for all her hard work and 
dedication to running a very effective constituency office. 
Maureen Paron is our casual office person and is a valued part 
of our office. These two ladies serve the Cut Knife-Turtleford 
constituents very well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during our leadership campaign I was honoured to 
have been appointed minister of Government Relations, First 
Nations, Métis and Northern Affairs. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
take this time to recognize some of the staff in that ministry that 
made my life a lot easier with their professionalism and 
knowledge. They are, in no particular order, Shannon Andrews, 
Carla Taylor-Brown, Emma L’Heureux, Alicia Hubbard, 
Tennille Olson, Grant McLellan, and Launa Birnie. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to recognize Deputy Minister 
Tammy Kirkland and all her officials for their guidance and 
very open conversation in all matters pertaining to Government 
Relations, like emergency measures, SAMA [Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency], community planning, First 
Nations, Métis and Northern Affairs issues, and the list goes on. 
I thank you all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, preparing a provincial budget is a long and trying 
task. I’d like to thank the Finance minister for her leadership 
through this process. The minister, along with treasury board 
members and all the ministries, have been going hard since the 
2017-18 budget was introduced. Many difficult decisions had to 
be made, but at the end of the day a fair and realistic plan is on 
track. Mr. Speaker, a very special thank you to the Finance 
minister on her first budget, and to everyone involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2018 budget . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I 
didn’t mean to wake him up but it’s . . . Mr. Speaker, the 
2018-19 budget keeps Saskatchewan on track to return to 
balance next year with major investments in health care, 
education, social services, and infrastructure, a steadily 
improving outlook over the next four years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has a plan and a plan that is on 
track. One year ago we charted a three-year course to reduce 
Saskatchewan’s dependency on resource revenue and balance 
the budget by 2019. This year’s budget keeps that plan on track 
by controlling government spending, making important 
investments in health care, education, social services, and by 
keeping our economy strong through investments in 
infrastructure and new business incentives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2018-19 budget invests in a record 5.77 billion 
to improve health care for all Saskatchewan people, up nearly 
2.5 per cent from last year. That includes 3.5 billion for 
Saskatchewan Health Authority operating funding, up nearly 72 
million from total funding last year to the 12 regional 
authorities. At the same time 19 million in administration costs 

were being saved by the amalgamation of the 12 health 
authorities, savings that are being reinvested in front-line 
services as part of the 72 million increased in operating funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government will provide additional 700,000 
this year to ensure universal 100 per cent coverage of HIV 
drugs for Saskatchewan people and to provide other HIV 
supports. More than 520,000 is being invested in new programs 
to ensure that babies born in Saskatchewan hospitals are 
screened for hearing loss. And 2.8 million is being provided to 
fulfill the government’s commitment to provide individualized 
funding for children with autism spectrum disorder. Initial 
funding of 4,000 per child under the age of six will be provided 
this year. 
 
[22:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also fulfills the Premier’s commitment 
to increase education funding by $30 million. This will allow 
school divisions to continue to support students in the 
classroom by maintaining or hiring up to 400 teachers and other 
in-school professionals. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s 27 school 
divisions will receive 1.87 billion in school operating funding 
for the 2018-19 school year, up 1.6 per cent compared to last 
year. 
 
The budget also provides nearly 77 million in child care 
funding. This will support more than 16,000 existing licensed 
child care spaces in Saskatchewan and help create 2,500 more 
spaces by 2020. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a few minutes on a few 
ministries and what is happening. I will start with Agriculture, 
which is very important to the province and the Cut 
Knife-Turtleford constituency. Mr. Speaker, the 2018 budget, 
’18-19 budget, invests 378.6 million to help ensure a strong 
agricultural sector, including a record investment in agriculture 
research and continuing strong support for business risk 
management programs such as crop insurance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget also includes increased funding for 
Animal Protection Services of Saskatchewan, the organization 
that enforces Saskatchewan’s animal protection Act. The new 
three-year funding agreement will provide the organization 
800,000 a year for investigative services, an increase from 
610,000. We appreciate the work of the Animal Protection 
Services of Saskatchewan in supporting a sound animal welfare 
system, and this fund will help ensure the resources that are 
needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 31.8 million agriculture research budget 
includes support for programs that foster the adoption of the 
new technologies and increased funding for Ag-West Bio and 
food centre and livestock forage research through the support in 
the Livestock and Forage Centre of Excellence. This funding is 
part of the 71.2 million that will be invested in strategic 
programs and the Canadian Agricultural Partnership, better 
known as CAP. CAP program details were announced at the 
end of March with the signing of the new federal-provincial 
framework. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is making important investments 
targeted to the continuous sustainability and growth of the 



3852 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

agriculture industry. Agriculture is a major contributor to the 
province’s economy, and this budget will help producers 
increase crop production, value-added processing, and agri-food 
exports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, approximately 258.2 million will go toward fully 
funding business risk management programs including 
AgriStability, AgriInvest, western livestock price insurance, and 
crop insurance, which this year added fire insurance as coverage 
feature for pasture land. The 2018-19 budget also includes 3 
million for irrigation infrastructure rehabilitation costs and 
irrigation asset transfer to irrigation districts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan producers harvested a crop of about 
35 million tonnes in 2017, the fifth consecutive year the 
province harvest has been more than 30 million tonnes. 
Saskatchewan’s 27 agricultural exports were the fourth largest 
on record, with total sales of 13.5 billion, an increase of more 
than 60 per cent since 2010. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about corrections and 
policing. The 2018-19 budget will provide full funding to the 
protection and response team, better known as PRT, launched 
last summer. The PRT was created in response to 
recommendations by the government caucus committee on 
crime and consists of 250 armed officers who have arrest and 
detention powers, including municipal police, RCMP, Ministry 
of Highways vehicle enforcement officers, and Ministry of 
Environment conservation officers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget includes 4.9 million in funding from 
SGI for enhancements to the rural crime strategy. This includes 
funding for an additional 30 police officers to phase in the 
province’s combined traffic safety services unit. Additionally, 
the Ministry of Corrections and Policing is providing a 
continued annual funding of 1 million to address other 
recommendations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re proud of the work that’s been done on the 
protection and response team and look forward to continuing to 
implement the recommendations of the committee of which I 
was part of. Our government understands that many rural 
residents have very legitimate concerns about crime and safety, 
and more work needs to be done. We’ve already seen positive 
feedback from the initial development of the protect and 
response team, and we are confident that it will have a 
long-term strategy effect for reduction in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since being announced in August 2017, the PRT 
has made significant progress including: the launch of a 
dedicated safer communities and neighbourhoods in Prince 
Albert; the creation of intervention circles that use 
Saskatchewan hub framework in the Muskoday First Nation 
and Ochapowace First Nation; the purchase of automated 
licence plate recognition technology for PRT officers; the 
addition of three policing positions to the province’s combined 
forces special enforcement unit in Prince Albert, Regina, 
Saskatoon to focus on guns, gangs, and drugs; reassignment of 
10 RCMP positions to provide relief to detachments 
experiencing staff shortages; and the completion of 
Saskatchewan’s first rural crime innovation challenge which 
has led to the development of an app-based tracking system to 
alert landowners about irregular activity related to their 

property. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the committee’s recommendations also include 
ensuring RCMP resources and personnel are used effectively in 
rural areas, reviewing legislation to allow municipalities to 
jointly administer alternative policing programs, providing 
more funding for on-reserve programming and services, and 
other measures. 
 
The recommendations are the result of the consultations the 
committee conducted beginning in November 2016. As part of 
these consultations, the committee toured 10 communities over 
12 days and met with 58 stakeholders. Written submissions 
were also accepted and reviewed by the committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about energy and 
resources. The 2018-19 budget will see significant 
enhancements to the province’s petroleum and mineral resource 
sectors. The Ministry of Energy and Resources’ budget, 45.8 
million, includes an increase of 665,000 or 1.5 per cent. 
 
The increased funding will contribute to the following 
initiatives: 750,000 for a new four-year mineral development 
strategy, to create an incentive program to encourage mineral 
exploration and to increase the amount of geophysical data 
available. An additional one million to continue the 
enhancement of the integrated resource information system, 
better known as IRIS, for the pipeline regulation enhancement 
program. IRIS is a custom-built online business system that 
supports the development and regulation of Saskatchewan’s oil 
and gas industry. This continues the government’s commitment 
announced last year for a multi-year program to strengthen 
Saskatchewan’s approach to pipeline regulation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget helps ensure that our energy and 
resource sector continue to lead the way in Saskatchewan’s 
economic growth. With the additional funding announced, our 
government is on track to fulfill our commitment to enhance 
our oil and gas regulatory programs. The new mineral 
development strategy will encourage industry to conduct more 
exploration in Saskatchewan and will help protect important 
northern jobs in our current mining sectors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the funding for pipeline regulation enhancement 
programs supports the Government of Saskatchewan in working 
closely with the oil and gas industry to ensure the pipeline 
sector operates safely in Saskatchewan. These additional 
resources will address critical planning and IT [information 
technology] development needs and prep announced last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in its recent 2017 survey for the mining 
investment, the Fraser Institute ranked Saskatchewan second 
out of 91 jurisdictions in the world for mining investment 
attractiveness. Preliminary estimates indicate that the value of 
Saskatchewan’s mineral sales for 2017 was about 6.5 billion, up 
slightly from the year before, and the province remains a global 
leader in uranium and potash production. 
 
Mr. Speaker, oil and gas is responsible for an estimated 15 per 
cent of Saskatchewan’s gross domestic product, and recent 
numbers such as increased production, exploration, and revenue 
have shown clear signs of a renewed activity and growth in the 
industry. Saskatchewan is the second-largest producer among 



April 16, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3853 

Canada’s provinces, accounting for an estimated 12 per cent of 
the nation’s crude oil production. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about Government 
Relations. The 2018-19 budget continues to provide strong, 
predictable, and stable funding for municipalities. The budget 
provides 412.9 million for direct provincial support to 
municipalities, including municipal revenue sharing as well as 
funding for municipal infrastructure projects and other 
community services. Municipal revenue sharing remains on 
track at near-record highs. The amount is set based on 1 point of 
the provincial sales tax collected by government in the 2016-17 
year. Mr. Speaker, since 2007 municipal revenue sharing has 
increased from 127 million in 2007-08 to 241 million, an 89.5 
per cent increase. It will be distributed as follows: 155 million 
to urban municipalities, 68.1 million to rural municipalities, and 
18 million to northern municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province continues to control spending and 
meet fiscal challenges. Our government’s commitment to 
municipalities remains clear. Virtually no other area of funding 
has seen the overall levels of funding increase that 
municipalities have received through revenue sharing over the 
past 10 years. Our goal with this budget is to continue to 
provide stable and predictable revenue sharing to the 
municipalities while remaining committed to our fiscal plan of 
returning to balanced budgets by 2019-20. 
 
I’ll just move on a little bit here because of our time and talk a 
little bit about grants-in-lieu. Mr. Speaker, in 2017-18 budget 
the government made the decision to end some payments that 
have been made to municipalities by SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy, and undertake a complete review in order to find a 
solution that is equitable to all urban municipalities. 
 
The following changes will come into effect 2018-19. 
Grants-in-lieu of property taxes: SaskPower and SaskEnergy 
will pay grants-in-lieu of property taxes on owned real estate 
assets in Saskatchewan but exclude generation, transmission, 
and distribution facilities as well as pipelines and land. 
 
SaskEnergy municipal surcharge: SaskEnergy will now collect 
a municipal surcharge on behalf of all urban municipalities at a 
rate of 5 per cent. This charge will appear on the SaskEnergy 
customer bills. Municipalities can choose to opt out of this 
program. Prior to this year, 109 Saskatchewan urban 
municipalities received the municipal surcharge while most 
municipalities were not eligible to receive it. This change 
ensures fairness for all cities, towns, and villages, including 
resort villages, in Saskatchewan. The SaskPower municipal 
surcharge: Mr. Speaker, there will be no change to the existing 
surcharge. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this time I would like to just briefly talk 
about assessment, my favourite topic. And, you know, the 
member from P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote constantly brings 
it up that the government has raised property taxes. Well that’s 
really not how it works. The Saskatchewan system of 
assessment uses the mass appraisal methodology so that 
assessments are done according to the fairest, most defensible 
system available. Mass appraisal means valuing a group of 
properties as of a given date using the standard methods and 
statistical analysis. This includes developing valuation models 

capable of valuing all properties. 
 
In addition to it determining mill rates, local governments have 
the authority to apply a series of tax tools such as mill rate 
factors by local property classes, minimum tax, and base tax. 
Cities also have the ability to create additional tax subclasses to 
apply mill rate factors. As well, cities can phase in tax changes 
due to revaluation. These tax tools further impact the specific 
tax bill received by the taxpayer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this system was introduced in 1997, and that’s 
when the NDP were in government. We still use the same 
system today. It’s been revamped a little bit in 2001, a little bit 
in 2005, and after every re-evaluation there’s always some 
tweaking of the system that have to go. 
 
Now the NDP talked about cleaning up the education property 
tax. In 2008 in the municipality that I live in, the school 
division mill rate was 22.5 mills. Our government implemented 
the largest property tax cut in the province’s history, reducing 
EPT [education property tax] by 124 million in 2009. Since 
2008-09, our government has reduced the cumulative education 
property tax burden on residents by over $2.3 billion. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the mill rates for EPT are the same as last 
year. Residential is at 4.12, commercial at 6.27, resource at 
9.68. And I was hoping that the member would have been here 
so that she could get that, but I guess she can pull it off of 
Hansard tomorrow and maybe she’ll have a little clearing of 
understanding on that. She could also go to the SAMA website 
and it explains it very well there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[22:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to highlight some of the highway 
improvements for Cut Knife-Turtleford constituency. Two sets 
of passing lanes from North Battleford to Cochin will be built, 
along with 30 kilometres of resurfacing of the same area. 
Highway 26 will see approximately 38 kilometres of 
resurfacing. Mr. Speaker, these two areas have seen significant 
traffic increases. With SAGD [steam-assisted gravity drainage] 
plants being built and foreign production, truck traffic has 
increased drastically on Highway 26, along with grain and OSB 
[oriented strand board] traffic on Highway 4 north of The 
Battlefords. With 2,600 properties on Jackfish and Murray 
Lake, these two highways are extremely busy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we were able to make all of these investments in 
this budget with no increases to tax rates. That means all 
provincial tax rates including those for sales tax, income tax, 
and property tax remain the same. And of course, Mr. Speaker, 
this budget contains no carbon tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in order to ensure taxes stay low as possible and 
that we are able to maintain and enhance important government 
services, our government continues to make every effort to 
control spending. Controlling compensation costs, the largest 
single budgetary expense for government, is key to keeping 
Saskatchewan’s fiscal plan on track. Mr. Speaker, employees 
and unions understand the fiscal environment and continue to 
bargain in good faith. 
 
Beyond negotiated settlements, we have set a goal of 70 million 



3854 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2018 

in savings over two years — 35 million in this budget, and 
another 35 next. These savings, Mr. Speaker, we’ll accomplish 
largely through efficiency initiatives and attrition, as part of our 
government’s commitment to return to balance in 2019-20. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, this year’s budget keeps 
Saskatchewan on track by controlling spending, delivering 
high-quality programs and services for Saskatchewan people, 
investing in infrastructure, keeping our economy strong, and 
returning to balance in 2019-20. Mr. Speaker, this budget sets 
the stage for a new decade of growth by keeping 
Saskatchewan’s finances and our economy on track. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion and not the 
amendment. And I move that we now adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
Deputy House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that this House 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:19.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3827 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3830 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3832 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3836 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3839 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3841 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3846 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3848 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3850 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


