


















































March 13, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 27A  TUESDAY, MARCH 13, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3367 
 March 13, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. Why 
are you on your feet, sir? 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask for leave to 
make a personal statement. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for a 
personal statement. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Apology 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today I 
was made aware of a statement I had made in the fall sitting that 
was incorrect. Mr. Speaker, it never was or never is my 
intention to knowingly mislead any member of this House. I 
consider all my colleagues honourable members and I assure 
you that I would never deliberately mislead this House in any 
way. I apologize unequivocally to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I thank you for your 
statement. I will take that under consideration and I will 
comment further later today. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for an extended 
introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 
members of this House for granting leave. It’s my great 
pleasure to introduce through you, Mr. Speaker, to all members 
of this House a very special guest: Ms. Lu Xu, the consul 
general of the People’s Republic of China, based out of 
Calgary. She’s on her first official visit to Saskatchewan and, 
Mr. Speaker, Ms. Lu is an experienced diplomat who has also 
served in the United States, the United Kingdom, as well as the 
Czech Republic. 
 
And accompanying Ms. Lu this afternoon are Mr. Shan 
Ganggang and Mr. Bai Jie, who are also with the consulate in 

Calgary. Mr. Speaker, accompanying them are Melinda Carter 
and Nadette Schermann from our protocol office. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the consul general has a very busy schedule 
during her visit to Saskatchewan here today. She’s already met 
with a number of ministers in the government, the Provincial 
Secretary, as well as representatives from the University of 
Regina. And I’m looking forward to visiting with the consul 
general later this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re thankful for Ms. Lu in spending time in our 
province. Saskatchewan and China are very strong friends and 
our two jurisdictions have a long-standing trade partnership 
dating back to the year 1961. And that’s when Canadian prime 
minister — from our province — Mr. John Diefenbaker 
authorized Canada’s first sale of grain to the People’s Republic 
of China. That was the beginning of a fruitful commercial 
arrangement, which has blossomed most notably in recent 
years. 
 
Today China is our second-largest export market. The value of 
our exports to China are up more than 300 per cent in the last 
decade, to about three and a half billion dollars. We continue to 
ship grain to China and a number of other commodities as well, 
including potash; most recently, uranium; as well as canola, 
lentils, and pork, as of a number of years ago. 
 
And let me say on behalf of the people of this province how 
thankful we are for that great and strong trading relationship. 
We are grateful for our relationship with China, which should 
be noted is a two-way partnership. China is also our source of 
our second-largest source of imports. Chinese companies have 
invested more than a billion dollars in the province of 
Saskatchewan since 2009 and, Mr. Speaker, there are other 
dimensions to our relationship as well. 
 
Saskatchewan post-secondary institutions have more than 100 
academic and research partnerships with post-secondary 
institutions in China. China also shares our desire to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions through the use of carbon capture and 
storage. Like Saskatchewan, China is making significant 
investments in CCS [carbon capture and storage] and is 
working with our international carbon capture and storage 
knowledge centre based right out of Saskatchewan here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would close by noting this: that Ms. Lu is now 
posted in a city where the colour is red. This has some 
significance. That colour is associated with the Calgary Flames. 
In China the colour red stands for happiness, it stands for 
success, and it stands for good fortune. All of these, Calgary 
Flames fans are hoping for this year. The Flames are still in the 
playoff hunt, and that is very painful for myself as an Edmonton 
Oilers fan to acknowledge. But, Mr. Speaker, I hope Ms. Lu 
and her colleagues can attend an NHL [National Hockey 
League] playoff game in Calgary in the coming weeks. That’s 
even harder to acknowledge as an Edmonton Oilers fan. Mr. 
Speaker, playoff hockey is as Canadian as it comes, almost as 
Canadian as a Saskatchewan Roughrider football game, Mr. 
Speaker, and it doesn’t happen often in Calgary or Edmonton. 
 
We are honoured here in this province by a visit from the 
consul general, and we are thankful for the long and enduring 



3368 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

friendship that we have with the People’s Republic of China. 
And I would ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
welcoming our guests to this legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 
Premier in extending our welcome to our guests from the 
People’s Republic of China. So glad to have you here today. 
Thank you very much for joining us. And to join with the 
Premier in acknowledging the importance of that relationship, 
both in the ongoing relationship with the People’s Republic of 
China in trade, the existing relationships that we have, and the 
opportunity for future engagement and future opportunities. 
 
I also want to point out the important role that people from the 
People’s Republic of China have played in our own history 
right here in Saskatchewan. The Chinese-Canadian community 
has been part of the fabric of our province for over 100 years, 
and as pointed out when discussing the students that are 
coming, more people continue to come and be part of this 
province and integrated into the life of this province. And that’s 
something I think that is very positive. So I thank you for 
joining us, and I ask all of the members to join me in 
welcoming the representatives to this Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services . . . 
I’m sorry, Advanced Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my great pleasure and honour to 
introduce to you and seated in your gallery, three students from 
the University of Regina Students’ Union. They are Shawn 
Wiskar, Haris Khan, and Derrick Gagnon. All three of these 
young individuals have been great community champions. 
They’ve been involved in a Dress for Success event recently to 
help raise clothing items for women who are less fortunate. 
They’ve been involved in stand-up comedy. They’ve been 
involved in a number of mental health initiatives. And I just 
would like to welcome them to their legislature and thank them 
very much for their leadership on campus. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s my honour to join with the minister and 
welcome these leaders within our university, but leaders within 
our province, to their Assembly: Derrick Gagnon, Shawn 
Wiskar, and Haris Khan. I’ve gotten to know Haris rather well. 
But these are three strong leaders within our province for 
students, but those that have also, as has been identified, raised 
attention and dollars for important causes within our 
community. 
 
I know recently I had the chance to join with Haris and with 
president Jermain McKenzie, along with MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] from Regina Lakeview to take a pie in 
the face. Actually the member for Regina Lakeview seemed a 
little too happy to put a pie into my face, Mr. Speaker, and all 
raising very important dollars for Hope’s Home. It’s my 
pleasure to welcome these student leaders to their Assembly 
and to thank them for their leadership within our province. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly board members of the Saskatchewan 
Young Brokers Network, who are in attendance today as part of 
the Insurance Brokers’ Association of Saskatchewan’s first-ever 
day at the legislature. Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, they 
are . . . Well I can’t really see them but I know they’re there, 
and I’d ask them if they could give everyone else a little wave 
when they’re acknowledged: President Alyssa Taksas, Jaycee 
Turtle, Jenna Dusyk, Reece Ricard, and Catherine Schraeder. 
 
Over the past 15 years, the YBN [Young Brokers Network] has 
evolved into an energetic group of more than 120 professionals 
under the age of 40 that promotes the industry as a rewarding 
career path by offering an array of educational and networking 
experiences, including the inaugural Saskatchewan Summit of 
Young Insurance Professionals which will be held in Saskatoon 
April 12th. Today representatives from both the YBN and IBAS 
[Insurance Brokers’ Association of Saskatchewan] are meeting 
with several ministers, caucus policy committees, and various 
other key stakeholders. I’d ask all members to welcome these 
individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to join with 
the minister in welcoming these young brokers to their 
Legislative Assembly for their first-ever lobby day. I 
understand that you were up very early this morning, I think 
around 7:30 . . . to be here for meetings at 7:30, and I do hope 
that you had a fruitful and rewarding day as your first-ever 
lobby day. 
 
I know, and maybe this doesn’t come as a surprise to people 
here, but in the meeting this morning we talked about the fact 
that brokers are in communities all over this province, in fact a 
huge percentage of communities. And often in a small town you 
might have a post office and a rink and your local insurance 
broker. It’s part of the fabric of this province. And I want to 
thank each of you for being here today and welcome each of 
you to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member from Regina Lakeview in welcoming our young 
brokers here today. Specifically I would like to welcome their 
president, Alyssa Taksas. Alyssa and I have known each other 
personally for a great number of years — I didn’t count it out. 
And I probably have something to do with the fact that she 
ended up in a military uniform at some point. I don’t know 
whether that was a good thing or a bad thing, but we spent a lot 
of time together and I’m very proud of where she’s come and 
the leadership she’s shown on this front, and would like to 
welcome her to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3369 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to the rest of the members of the legislature, I’d like to 
introduce a very special quest who’s sitting behind our area in 
the House here, Mark Wartman, a former MLA for Qu’Appelle 
Valley here in Regina and a former minister of Agriculture for 
four years — well respected in his role there — now working 
for the Nature Conservancy. And so I’d ask all members to join 
with me in welcoming Mark back to his legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, seated in the east gallery, I want to recognize as 
well certainly Carol Kos that’s here who’s been identified and 
recognized before. But nice to have you here, Carol, somebody 
who’s given a lot of service as a nurse to her province as well. 
 
But I don’t know that Chris Gust has been welcomed to his 
Assembly before. And I want to welcome Chris Gust, a friend, 
a tireless leader within our community, and someone who’s a 
young and strong leader with the ironworkers within our 
province and the building trades within the province. So it’s a 
pleasure to welcome Chris to his Assembly and to express 
thanks for all of his efforts within our province. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise today 
to present a petition from the citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, these good citizens 
recognize, more importantly, the great work that’s being done at 
our Boundary dam 3 project with carbon capture. We heard 
yesterday in a member’s statement 2 million tonnes have now 
been captured from that plant. This is a far better method than 
any carbon tax would ever be. 
 
[13:45] 
 
If you take a look at the agricultural sinks that are involved in 
this province, we’re not getting credit for, a credit to the farmers 
in this province and their farming techniques. I think this is far 
more important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of 
Shellbrook, Holbein, Canwood, Mont Nebo, and Parkside. I do 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’m presenting petitions on behalf of concerned 
citizens as it relates to the cuts to post-secondary education in 
our province. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
These petitions today are signed by good citizens of 
Saskatchewan. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition calling on the government to stop the cuts to our 
children’s classrooms. Those who have signed this petition wish 
to draw our attention to the following: that the Sask Party has 
cut at least $674 in government funding for every student across 
this province; and to the fact that the government hiked 
education property tax by $67 million in the last budget, but at 
the same time clawed back $54 million from our children’s 
classrooms. And of course these cuts have had a profound and 
terrible impact on our children’s classrooms; for example, we 
have seen decreases to busing and the loss of pre-K 
[pre-kindergarten] programs designed for children with special 
needs and children who are deaf and hard of hearing. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and stop making 
families, teachers, and students, and everyone who works 
in our educational system pay the price for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition reside in 
Preeceville, Regina, and Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to present a petition 
from citizens of Regina, and this one is in regards to the carbon 
capture tax. The people signing this wish to bring to our 
attention the following: the Sask Party government has spent 
billions of taxpayers’ dollars on the carbon capture project at 
Boundary dam 3, and after four years it is still only online 61 
per cent of the time and just barely has captured only half of its 
original targets. The parliamentary budget office has stated that 
this project is equivalent to placing a price of $57 per tonne on 
carbon, and this carbon capture tax has resulted in three power 
rate increases in two years and has the average Saskatchewan 
family paying more than $500 each year on their power bills 
since the Sask Party came into power. 
 
The Sask Party’s refusal to propose and defend a 
made-in-Saskatchewan plan is costing Saskatchewan $62 
million in federal funding, and this means that Saskatchewan 
people will be the only Canadians forced to pay Ottawa’s 
carbon tax. The Sask Party government is hurting 



3370 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

Saskatchewan’s economy, costing families and businesses, and 
this project has not seen the results the Sask Party promised or 
are still bragging about. And the Sask Party government is 
looking at expanding carbon capture to Boundary dams 4 and 5 
which would cost the people of Saskatchewan billions more. 
 
So I’ll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to avoid another carbon capture 
tax on the people of Saskatchewan by not expanding 
carbon capture projects. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition calling for the restoration of public inter-municipal 
transportation for persons with disabilities. And people signing 
this petition want us to be aware of the following: that the cruel 
and heartless Sask Party budget of 2017 cut public 
inter-municipal transportation services for persons with 
disabilities, including all persons with various disabilities. This 
decision has left persons with disabilities stranded and isolated 
in both urban and rural communities, and that since cutting 
transportation services for persons with disabilities, the Sask 
Party has failed to replace this service in any meaningful way. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we know that The Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Code states, and I quote, “Access to equal, dignified 
transportation is essential to the achievement of equality for 
persons with disabilities.” It goes on and I quote further: 
“Persons with disabilities have a human right to adequate, 
dignified public transportation services on an equal basis. The 
Code guarantees the right to equal treatment with respect to 
services without discrimination based on disability.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
public inter-municipal transportation services for persons 
with disabilities. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. The people signing this petition 
come from the city of Regina. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition calling on the government to get big money out of 
politics. These citizens wish to bring to your attention that 
Saskatchewan’s outdated election Act allows corporations, 
unions, and individuals, even those outside the province, to 
make unlimited donations to our province’s political parties; 
that the people of Saskatchewan deserve to live in a fair 
province where all voices are equal and money can’t influence 
politics. But over the past 10 years, the Sask Party has received 
12.61 million in corporate donations, of that, 2.87 million 

coming from companies outside Saskatchewan. That 
Saskatchewan politics should belong to Saskatchewan people, 
and that the federal government and the provinces of Alberta, 
Manitoba, Quebec, and Nova Scotia have moved to limit this 
influence and level the playing field by banning corporate and 
union donations to political parties. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign finance laws 
to end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 
from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 
on individual donations. 

 
This petition is signed by citizens of Regina, Mr. Speaker. I do 
so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

International Women’s Day 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. March 8th 
marked International Women’s Day. This day is celebrated 
globally, highlighting the economic, political, and social 
achievement of women around the world. 
 
We see so many women in Saskatchewan also make positive 
strides, becoming leaders within their own community, and we 
need to celebrate them. Mr. Speaker, in our own Assembly we 
have so many influential female MLAs who raise their voices, 
stand up for the needs of their constituents, and we must thank 
them for blazing a trail of opportunity for our generations and 
many generations to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, International Women’s Day is more than just a 
celebration. It is also a very important day to educate both men 
and women on the importance of equality, inclusion, and how 
every community can benefit from it. It was truly an 
encouraging day to see so many women with testimonials of 
how influential they were in everyone’s lives and how they 
touched so many communities. The acts of courage and 
leadership that we have seen decade after decade has 
strengthened the foundation for future generations to close the 
gender gap in business, but also, Mr. Speaker, in public office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
celebrating and acknowledging the women in their lives and 
around the world who continue to inspire us. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Tim Hortons Brier Held in Regina 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. One of 
the curling world’s premier events, the Tim Hortons Brier, 
wrapped up this past Sunday at the Brandt Centre, located in the 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3371 

beautiful and ever-happening constituency of Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. The champion Gushue rink repeated their 
march to the winner’s circle in a thrilling 6-4 victory over the 
Bottcher Alberta rink. 
 
Congratulations to team Gushue for a win that was literally 
right on the button. And congratulations to Steve Laycock and 
Team Saskatchewan for representing the green and gold in fine 
style. And congratulations to all the rinks and officials and 
supporters from across the country who helped make the 2018 
Brier such a roaring success. 
 
Like many large events, the Brier attracted thousands of people 
to Saskatchewan and helped to generate millions of dollars in 
economic activity. Who says throwing rocks at houses doesn’t 
pay, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And amidst all the action, the prestigious Paul McLean Award 
was given to the Regina Leader-Post’s Murray McCormick for 
his significant contributions to the sport of curling. McCormick 
commenced his curling coverage in 1983 with the women’s 
world championship in Moose Jaw and he’s been hurrying hard 
ever since, Mr. Speaker. Great work, Murray McCormick. 
 
Last but certainly not least, events like the 2018 Brier cannot 
take place without tremendous support of the host community, 
and in this regard the team of over 750 volunteers turned in a 
championship effort, putting on one of the best Briers ever. 
Thank you very much to them, Mr. Speaker. Thank you as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

Rural Women’s Month Proclaimed 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In recognition 
of the achievements made by rural women across the province, 
March has been proclaimed Rural Women’s Month in 
Saskatchewan. Thousands of women across this province have 
chosen to develop their careers in agriculture industries, 
currently accounting for every one in four farm operators. 
 
Across Canada almost 78,000 women are involved in these 
industries, and we see this number grow each and every day. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we continue to encourage 
young women to pursue careers in our agriculture sector and we 
enhance our support for women who are already our producers. 
 
Saskatchewan is a leader in the agriculture sector across the 
world, and our growing economy relies on the innovations and 
advancements of this industry. Women contribute very heavily 
to these industries as they provide innovative and competitive 
perspectives to our sectors and industries. Their hard work and 
efforts do not go unnoticed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the House join me in 
acknowledging Rural Women’s Month and in thanking all the 
incredible women throughout our agriculture industry for all the 
amazing work that they have done and will continue to do so. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 

Women’s Final 8 Tournament a Success 
for Huskies and Cougars 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this past weekend the 
province of Saskatchewan proved once again that we know how 
to host national events. In addition to the Brier, the U of R 
[University of Regina] gym was packed and the action on the 
court was non-stop all weekend for the 2018 U Sports Women’s 
Final 8 basketball tournament. 
 
This was the third time in the last decade that the University of 
Regina Cougars have hosted this national tournament. And not 
only did Saskatchewan host the tournament, we put forward 
two nationally ranked teams. Both the University of 
Saskatchewan Huskies and the University of Regina Cougars 
competed for the right to raise the Bronze Baby. Unfortunately, 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan teams were unable to win it all, 
but the Huskies and the Cougars won silver and bronze 
respectively. 
 
The bronze medal was a fitting end for veteran Cougar forward 
Charlotte Kot, who has endured multiple knee surgeries and 
injuries that will prevent her from playing competitive 
basketball into the future. Her perseverance was an inspiration 
to the entire team and she lit it up on the court. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the U of R Cougars 
organizing committee for hosting this tremendous event and for 
the fans and volunteers that showed support of this event, 
attended, and especially to the Saskatchewan teams that make 
us so proud. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You can never 
congratulate someone too much. It was an exciting weekend for 
both the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] Huskies and the 
U of R Cougars as their women’s basketball teams competed 
for the national title over a four-day tournament held here in 
Regina. 
 
The Cougars defeated the Huskies in the Can West final the 
week prior, and basketball fans across the province were eager 
for a rematch. In a semifinal game Saturday night, the two 
teams squared off again in front of a crowd of close to 2,400 
people. The Huskies were successful this time around, beating 
the Cougars 74 to 71. The Cougars would then take the bronze 
over the McGill Martlets. 
 
In the gold medal game, the Huskies made their presence 
known and defended our province well. The Huskies fought 
hard right to the end, and would finish second in the nation. 
 
Though the rivalry between the Huskies and the Cougars 
remains strong, it was incredible to see the camaraderie in our 
basketball community as they came together to cheer on the 
nation’s best. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to please join me 
in congratulating the U of R Cougars on their bronze medal, 
and the U of S Huskies on their silver medal wins at the 
national championships. Thank you. 
 
[14:00] 



3372 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 

Telemiracle 42 Raises Record-Breaking Amount 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 42nd annual 
Telemiracle telethon was held on March 3rd and March 4th. 
And in an impressive display of Saskatchewan generosity, a 
new fundraising record was set. The final total was $7,150,000 
— far surpassing last year’s total of just over 5 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the annual telethon is hosted to raise funds for 
Kinsmen Foundation. Dozens of performers, along with 
hundreds of volunteers, worked tirelessly through the 20-hour 
event to make this telethon the most successful ever. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to take a moment to 
especially thank Susan Colbow who was this year’s 
chairperson. Susan also works as my constituency assistant, so I 
saw first-hand all of the time, effort, and heart she put into this 
event to ensure it was a success. I’d also like to acknowledge 
Lucien Wayne Jacobs for a record-setting donation of 1.2 
million, as well as Dr. Phil Thacker setting a new record just 
hours later with a donation of 1.5 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a reason the people of Saskatchewan have 
a reputation for being generous. It truly takes a community to 
come together for an event like this to see so much success year 
after year. On behalf of this Assembly I’d like to thank the 
Kinsmen Foundation and everyone who volunteered and 
donated to help Telemiracle 42 achieve so much success. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 

Remembering Kevin Phillips 
 
Mr. Goudy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last fall 
Kevin Phillips and his wife, April, invited my wife, Tannis, and 
I to attend the Throne Speech here in Regina. And honestly it’s 
a bit difficult for me to stand here in his place today. 
 
Kevin was a good friend, and so it was with mixed emotions 
that I ran to replace him that day. Even watching the results on 
the night of the by-election wasn’t as exciting as it could have 
been if things were different. When April gave me Kevin’s 
favourite tie on that night, it was her gracious way of saying 
that Kevin would have wanted me to serve in his place. And 
this green tie that I’m wearing now, I wear in honour of Kevin. 
You see, Mr. Speaker, I know that as I stand in this House 
today I stand as our constituency’s second first choice. Kevin 
was their first first choice. 
 
Anyone who knows April, she’s a strong and she’s a 
courageous lady, and this gesture that she showed shows the 
kind of character that she possesses. Mr. Speaker, this tie 
represents more for me than a cherished memory of a friend. It 
also represents a promise, and that promise is to April to honour 
her husband by serving with that same kind and faithful spirit 
that Kevin did. 
 
You know, it’s an easy thing to wear a friend’s tie, but in this 
place replacing Kevin, it’s a very difficult thing to fill his shoes. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Federal Carbon Pricing and Provincial Plan 
to Reduce Emissions 

 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The federal 
Environment minister, Catherine McKenna, informed the 
Premier this week that because of his refusal to develop a viable 
made-in-Saskatchewan climate change plan, Saskatchewan will 
be the only province not to qualify for energy infrastructure 
funding. We’ve lost $62 million. We’re the only province to 
have a federal plan imposed upon us.  
 
This Premier’s refusal to approach this issue in a constructive 
fashion, first when he was Environment minister, and 
continuing today, has already lost the people of Saskatchewan 
millions of dollars, delaying meaningful action on climate 
change and wasting valuable time that could have been spent 
creating thousands of jobs for Saskatchewan people in the 
renewable energy field.  
 
So my question for the Premier is, what’s the plan? Does the 
government actually intend to continue stalling past that 
September deadline? Do you intend to leave the money on the 
table and see a plan imposed on Saskatchewan rather than 
design a plan ourselves that works for Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I was remiss yesterday in 
welcoming the Leader of the Opposition to his role and 
thanking all of those candidates that ran in leadership contests 
on both sides of this House. And I was just thinking of the 
member from Melfort in filling our friend Mr. Phillips’s shoes, 
and I was picturing Kevin in his red pumps. 
 
So let me catch up to the member opposite’s question. Mr. 
Speaker, the plan is this. The plan is to ensure that we do not 
have this type of a tax, a $4 billion tax over the next five years 
on the people and the industries and the families in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to talk to the federal government 
and to our customers in some 150 countries around the world 
about what we are doing in our industries here in the province 
of Saskatchewan and why they should buy more product from 
our province, Mr. Speaker, because our ag products are 
produced with zero-till technology that makes crop agriculture 
virtually carbon neutral, Mr. Speaker. And in addition to that, 
we have our grasslands here in the province of Saskatchewan 
that offset two and a half times of our total emissions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We have world-leading carbon capture and storage technology, 
of which now has captured and stored 2 million tonnes of 
carbon, Mr. Speaker, technology that is now being utilized and 
conversed with places like India and China, Mr. Speaker. Just in 
Vietnam there is a coal-fired electrical generator that is under 
construction as we speak, Mr. Speaker, that is the equivalent 
capacity of SaskPower’s total electrical generating capacity, 
Mr. Speaker. Can you see the potential of this technology: 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3373 

zero-till drills, carbon capture and storage, Mr. Speaker, 
technology from the province of Saskatchewan to have an 
actual impact on global emissions all around the world? 
 
So this tax will not be on the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We will not be looking for $62 
million to pay $4 billion in order to get that grant from the 
federal government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, we heard a lot of great comments 
about the things that are happening here in this province, what 
we could do as leaders in addressing climate change, but we 
need a plan. What we have so far is a plan with no targets, no 
real measures. By all accounts, that’s not a plan, Mr. Speaker; 
that’s a wish. 
 
To have a proper carbon pricing plan in this province, a proper 
plan to address climate change, we need to make sure that it 
reduces emissions, that it protects producers, that it recognizes 
the role of producers in sequestration of carbon, that it protects 
trade-exposed industries, that it keeps life affordable, and that it 
creates new jobs in renewable energy. 
 
We can do all of that, but to do so we need to design it in 
Saskatchewan with farmers from Saskatchewan, with business 
leaders from Saskatchewan, with local experts in environmental 
and economic policy. Why does the Premier want to leave our 
best minds out of the process and leave the design of this plan 
to Justin Trudeau? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, we do have a plan. It’s called 
the prairie resilience plan. It’s a plan that works for 
Saskatchewan people and Saskatchewan industry. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a plan that’s endorsed by Crescent Point Energy. It’s 
endorsed by the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers. 
It’s endorsed by Mosaic company. It’s endorsed by the Regina 
Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Speaker. It’s endorsed by the 
Federated Co-operatives, Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this prairie resilience plan is part of our target. 
And part of our targets, Mr. Speaker, in addition to the prairie 
resilience plan, is to reduce our electrical generation emissions 
by some 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker. That’s 40 per cent, 
incorporating 50 per cent renewables here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, developed by our best and brightest minds here 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s fair to say that this is not a wish. These are 
targets that are put forward by the Government of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in conjunction with industry. What 
is a wish, Mr. Speaker, what is a wish is, Mr. Speaker, is when 
a party comes forward with two and a half billion dollars of 
promises, Mr. Speaker, two and a half billion dollars with no 
plan on how to backfill those, Mr. Speaker. Not even a carbon 
tax on the people of the province will pay for these types of 
promises, Mr. Speaker, promises that include $18 million for 
farmers to not spray their crops, Mr. Speaker. Only the NDP 
[New Democratic Party] would come up with an economic 
development plan like that. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, a plan that was an acceptable plan, 
that was a plan you could count on wouldn’t be largely filled 
with to be determined, which is what we saw from this side of 
the House. We expect you to do a better job. We expect them to 
do their homework. 
 
And one would hope, Mr. Speaker, that this government has 
also done their homework in terms of the legal case that they 
have to back up this position of intransigence, the way the 
Conservative Premier Pallister of Manitoba has. And the advice 
Manitoba got was pretty cut and dried, Mr. Speaker. As the 
Premier of Manitoba announced last October, and I quote: 
 

If we just say “no,” we get Trudeau. If we go to court, we 
lose. Our alternatives are pretty clear, I would say. We 
develop our made-in-Manitoba plan and we put it out 
there. 

 
My question is, Mr. Speaker, when all the other provinces have 
recognized that there’s no grounds for a constitutional 
challenge, why is the Premier planning to spend a fortune on a 
legal case that we know he’ll lose? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First and foremost, we’re certainly consulting with lawyers in 
the Saskatchewan Department of Justice, not the Manitoba 
Department of Justice, or lawyers in the province of Manitoba, 
Mr. Speaker. If it’s the position of the Leader of the Opposition 
that we should get all of our legal advice from lawyers outside 
of this province, Mr. Speaker, that would include a couple of 
legal minds on the other side of the aisle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a plan. It’s called prairie resilience. It’s a 
plan that will not see a carbon tax imposed on the people of 
Saskatchewan, a carbon tax that we know will not work to 
reduce emissions, Mr. Speaker, one that will kill jobs in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is a plan that has been 
endorsed. 
 
As the Leader of the Opposition indicates, where we need to 
consult with farmers, Mr. Speaker, farmers have consulted on 
this plan and they agree with this plan. We need to consult with 
industry. Industry has consulted on this plan and will consult in 
this year on this plan, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
made-in-Saskatchewan plan. We certainly would hope that the 
members opposite would be able to endorse this plan, and not a 
Trudeau carbon tax. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, a plan that leaves us 
losing $62 million because it doesn’t qualify for us to have that 
support that we need to invest in renewable energy. A plan with 
no targets, with no significant measures; it is simply a wish. 
 
But my question was not for the Minister of the Environment. It 
was for the Premier because this is his job to show leadership 
on this, Mr. Speaker. And I want to share a quote from his 
predecessor. His predecessor, Mr. Brad Wall, said that “The 



3374 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

people of Saskatchewan must be assured that any challenge 
based on the Constitution Act has a reasonable expectation of 
success.” 
 
Has the position of this Premier changed from the previous 
premier? Do you really want to pursue, do we really want to 
pursue an expensive case that we won’t win, instead of getting 
down to the work of designing a plan that works for 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Yes we do, Mr. Speaker. Yes we will, Mr. 
Speaker. We will always stand on behalf of the jobs and the 
industries that we have, that the people of Saskatchewan work 
in here in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
what this government has committed to do, and that’s what this 
government will continue to commit to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have talked about the impact of what a 
$50-per-tonne tax on the people of Saskatchewan would mean. 
Mr. Speaker, it would mean $4 billion over the next five years 
— $4 billion, Mr. Speaker, in order to get back 12 and a half, 
$12.4 million a year, Mr. Speaker, in this Low Carbon 
Economy Fund. We’ll be applying for the fund, Mr. Speaker. 
Last I checked, we’re still part of the nation of Canada. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ll be applying for the fund to ensure that we can 
reduce the emissions on behalf of the people in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker.  
 
And it’s only math like this, as I said, Mr. Speaker, it’s only 
math like this that doesn’t add up, Mr. Speaker. This is the same 
type of math with two and a half billion dollars of promises, 
Mr. Speaker, by that party over there, with no plan to pay for it, 
Mr. Speaker. It includes encouraging farmers to not apply 
chemicals to their crop, incentivizing farmers actually to 
produce less, Mr. Speaker. What would disincentivize our 
agriculture industry, our other industries, more than anything, 
Mr. Speaker, would be a $50 NDP carbon tax in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I was happy to see the Premier find 
his feet on this. I hope he will also find his way to show 
leadership and design a made-in-Saskatchewan plan that will 
actually address climate change and that will qualify, that will 
meet the requirements because otherwise . . . And I’d really like 
to see, I’d really like to see if this is his preference: would he 
prefer that that be designed by us, for us . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I’d ask that the members listen to the question 
and also be respectful of the answer, and let’s have a spirited 
and respectful debate. Thank you. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Just to end my question, thank you, Mr. Speaker, 
and thank you for that reminder. The question is, will this 
Premier show leadership, design a made-in-Saskatchewan plan 

that meets the requirements, or will we have a plan designed by 
Justin Trudeau? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, as I said earlier, we 
have a plan. We have a prairie resilience plan on behalf . . . that 
is endorsed by industries here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
What the opposition is really saying, Mr. Speaker, is they would 
trip over themselves, like the opposition to the west of us, in 
getting a carbon tax on the people and the industries and the 
jobs in the province of Saskatchewan without quite 
understanding what that actually means, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What that means is when you have a steel plant here in the 
province of Saskatchewan that has an 80 per cent reduced 
emissions profile when compared to the industry, Mr. Speaker, 
and you tax it, it will move, Mr. Speaker. It will move, quite 
likely to China. It’ll open up a blast furnace, more emissions in 
the world, Mr. Speaker, and we lose a thousand jobs right in 
this city, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they’re talking about, is 
moving jobs to other areas of the world, Mr. Speaker.  
 
That’s something this side of the House is not interested in. We 
will always stand for the industries that operate here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We will stand for the 
jobs in our communities across this province, Mr. Speaker, and 
we will always stand for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier is refusing to give a 
real answer to these important questions about why he’s 
opening the door to Justin Trudeau’s carbon price. All he can 
say is, just watch me. Well, Mr. Speaker, we have. And anyone 
who’s watched him as Environment minister knows there 
wasn’t much good to see. Nothing when it came to action on 
illegal drainage or water management, nothing when it comes to 
reducing our carbon emissions, and nothing in the 
Environmental Code when it comes to even mentioning climate 
change. 
 
So setting aside Trudeau senior’s quote, what in the Premier’s 
record as Environment minister should give people in 
Saskatchewan any confidence in his ability to protect us from 
the federally imposed carbon price? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I think the member opposite would know that in terms 
of water management in this province, it’s the Premier of 
Saskatchewan, this Premier of Saskatchewan when he was the 
Environment minister, brought in legislation in this House, 
passed legislation that really corrected a problem that existed 
for over 30 years in terms of how water management was 
operating in this province, including when that member was an 
Environment minister and did nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, greenhouse gas emissions in the 16 years the NDP 
were the government went up 70 per cent, and that member was 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3375 

an Environment minister and he did nothing. At the same time, 
Mr. Speaker, the economy, the province, and the population 
was going down, greenhouse gas emissions were going up 
under the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to this issue, the members opposite, 
who have a leader who said that we need a modest carbon tax, 
which wouldn’t actually work because the carbon tax has to 
meet the standard of the federal government. So throw that idea 
out the window, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 
we will not impose or have imposed a $4 billion tax on the 
people of Saskatchewan over the first five years that will net us 
in return $62 million. Only under the NDP does that math make 
any sense. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Nutana. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, at best, these answers are weak, 
but at most of the time they’re wrong and they’re expensive. 
They have sent millions of dollars to an American lobbyist to 
polish and promote carbon capture. Still they were left out of 
the large carbon capture coalition that was announced last week 
in the United States. Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s not forget. This 
comes after no one in the world, literally in the whole world, 
was willing to join the Sask Party’s so-called CCS global 
consortium. Mr. Speaker, they like to say that they’re leading 
the world, but the fact is the world leaders don’t even want 
them in their club, and they don’t want to sit at the lunch table. 
 
Why is the minister not more concerned about how little 
Saskatchewan people are getting in return for the billions of 
dollars that the Sask Party has dumped into CCS? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, first of all, the consortium that the member opposite 
talks about is an American-based consortium. We have contacts 
with that American-based consortium, including a number of 
the organizations that make up that American-based 
consortium. Mr. Speaker, we’ve had discussions with the State 
Department. We’ve had discussions with the Department of 
Energy about being a part of a future ministerial in Copenhagen 
later this year. We’re awaiting word on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in terms of this actual consortium, it’s an American-based 
consortium that the global institute on carbon capture based in 
Regina has partnerships with the individual organizations that 
make up the greater consortium. So once again, Mr. Speaker, 
the member is wrong in the premise of her question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I wish that this minister would 
refer to the facts before he gets up and speaks. Sask Party’s own 
numbers show that between January 2017 and January 2018, 
Boundary dam 3 and the CCS was only online an average of 61 
per cent of the time. There were a couple months that it hit 100 
per cent, but then it had to be shut down for months. After four 
years, it has still captured less than half of its target of 1 million 

tonnes per year, resulting in millions of dollars in penalties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of getting it right, this government is 
forcing power tax hikes, leaving Saskatchewan’s people 
vulnerable to Ottawa’s carbon price, and stubbornly rejecting 
$62 million in federal funding. Why is the Sask Party so 
committed to pushing this $1.5 billion carbon tax? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, only the members opposite 
would think that removing the equivalent of 500,000 vehicles 
from the province of Saskatchewan in terms of emissions would 
be a bad thing. Only the members opposite would see 2 million 
tonnes of carbon dioxide being sequestered and stored 
underground, that enhances oil recovery — which was frankly 
pioneered in this province, to their credit, under the NDP — 
only they would think that now that is a bad thing. And, Mr. 
Speaker, only the NDP would think that . . . At COP 
[Conference of Parties] 21 in Paris, the only reference by the 
UN [United Nations] secretariat for what Canada is doing in 
terms of emissions reductions is Boundary dam 3, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s the record of this province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite introduced a petition 
earlier today that quoted “Canada’s greenhouse gas emissions: 
developments, prospects and reductions.” That was the office of 
the parliamentary budget office, I believe was the document that 
she referenced. And, Mr. Speaker, I hope I get a subsequent 
question because, not surprising, the premise of the question 
was wrong. The information she provided to this House was 
incomplete. Again after again, time after time, incomplete 
information from the members opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Public-Private Partnerships 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, increasingly the Sask Party stands 
alone. And that’s true with their blind support of privatization 
as well. Yesterday the Conservative Government of Manitoba 
announced that they had done their homework. Mr. Speaker, 
they asked financial experts and they found that they could save 
money by going back to traditional builds. Mr. Speaker, now 
not only will teachers and students be actually able to open their 
windows and put things on the walls, instead of three schools, 
they’re getting a fourth one thrown in because of all the money 
that they’ve saved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the Sask Party ignoring the facts, and why 
are they still defending their 30-year rent-a-school scheme when 
they could’ve gotten more for less? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the province of Manitoba will make their own budgetary 
decisions when it comes to how they want to proceed on capital 
but, Mr. Speaker, this government has done its homework. And 
the members opposite only need to go online to look at the 
value-for-money reports that were done by this government 
when we made the decision to move ahead with P3s 



3376 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

[public-private partnership], Mr. Speaker. They’re saving the 
taxpayers of this province $100 million, Mr. Speaker, over the 
course of these contracts, Mr. Speaker. We put a P3 lens on 
these contracts, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the demonstration, 
that’s the result of that demonstration, Mr. Speaker, by 
reputable accounting firms in this country that verify those 
reports, Mr. Speaker. They’re written by them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we stand by the decision to put a P3 lens on those contracts, 
Mr. Speaker, and as we go forward with other capital projects, 
Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t always provide value for money, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve seen projects where we’ve put a P3 lens on the 
overpasses at Warman and Martensville, Mr. Speaker, where it 
didn’t save any money. And so we didn’t proceed that way; we 
proceeded with a traditional approach, Mr. Speaker. But where 
they make sense, where they save the taxpayers money — and 
in this case $100 million — to build, to build nine joint-use 
schools, Mr. Speaker, which were on time and on budget. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, yes, the former SaskBuilds minister 
has all the tired lines, but the reality is this is a failed model that 
has failed in every other place on the planet. And P3 contracts 
cost more and they hurt our kids’ experiences. My facts are 
straight. According to the guidelines, “P3 schools should be 
treated like leased space.”  
 
Mr. Speaker, P3s were never about saving money. It was about 
the Sask Party being able to cut ribbons and kick the can down 
the road, forcing generations to pay for their mistakes. 
Conservatives in Manitoba decided that it was better to revamp 
traditional builds so that they could save money and serve 
students. 
 
So the question for that minister is this, Mr. Speaker: why did 
the Sask Party plow ahead with their P3 plans rather than 
looking for a model that actually works? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve 
mentioned in this House on numerous occasions, we look and 
determine whether or not a P3 is going to save the taxpayers 
money over the term of those contracts, Mr. Speaker. We put 
that lens on these contracts, Mr. Speaker. So for the member to 
suggest that we didn’t look at options is completely wrong, Mr. 
Speaker. These school divisions are not leased, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re owned by the school divisions. They’re owned just like 
any other school, Mr. Speaker. But the fact of the matter is 
when we put a lens on this, when the accounting firms did the 
value-for-money reports which were available for the members 
opposite to look at, they’ll see that they save, over the term of 
the contact, $100 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is all about transferring risk, the Government 
of Saskatchewan who doesn’t take the risk on for the 
development and the building of these projects, Mr. Speaker. I 
can point out to hundreds of projects that have been built by the 
province of Saskatchewan over many, many years that have 
gone over time and over budget, Mr. Speaker. We don’t have to 
go far back in history to see the projects that were built, some of 

them. But these buildings were built on time, on budget. 
Children were in their classrooms for September of this last 
year, Mr. Speaker. We’ll continue to put this lens on these 
projects as we move forward, Mr. Speaker, where it makes 
sense for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Funding for Municipalities 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s cuts are 
hurting our communities. Their choices like cutting 
grants-in-lieu for municipalities and freezing revenue sharing 
are hurting Saskatchewan people in their hometowns. Unlike 
the Sask Party government, municipalities can’t run deficit after 
deficit when they have a shortfall. They can’t double the debt 
every five years. They have to run balanced budgets, so this 
leaves only two choices: raise taxes or cut services for people 
who rely on them. 
 
These tax hikes are Sask Party tax hikes and these cuts are Sask 
Party’s cuts. Will the new Premier work to restore funding to 
municipalities that his predecessor slashed, or will he try to 
force municipalities to take the blame for his party’s failure to 
support our communities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand by our 
government’s record in supporting revenue sharing, that we’ve 
had a tremendous program going forward in the last 10 years, 
certainly looking at the virtually doubling of what we’ve had 
with the previous government’s support for revenue sharing to 
our municipalities. We’ve had extensive consultations with our 
partners, with SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association] and SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities], and every one of them has supported this 
process and will be moving into the future. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — I ask leave for an introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you I’d like to introduce a constituent of mine in the 
west gallery. He’s an executive member of ours in our 
constituency of Melville-Saltcoats. He’s also a former president 
of the Saskatchewan Party and I consider a very good friend. 
I’d like everyone to welcome George Haas to his Legislative 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3377 

Assembly. Thank you. 
 

MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY 
QUEEN ELIZABETH II 

 
The Speaker: — So before orders of the day, I’ll ask all 
members to rise for the Commonwealth Day message of Her 
Majesty the Queen: 
 

We all have reason to give thanks for the numerous ways 
in which our lives are enriched when we learn from others. 
Through exchanging ideas, and seeing life from other 
perspectives, we grow in understanding and work more 
collaboratively towards a common future. There is a very 
special value in the insights we gain through the 
Commonwealth connection; shared inheritances help us 
overcome difference so that diversity is a cause for 
celebration rather than division. 
 
We shall see this in action at the Commonwealth Heads of 
Government Meeting which takes place in the United 
Kingdom next month, bringing together young people, 
business and civil society from across the Commonwealth. 
 
These gatherings are themselves fine examples of how 
consensus and commitment can help to create a future that 
is fairer, more secure, more prosperous and sustainable. 
Having enjoyed the warm hospitality of so many 
Commonwealth countries over the years, I look forward to 
the pleasure of welcoming the leaders of our family of 53 
nations to my homes in London and Windsor. 
 
Sport also contributes to building peace and development. 
The excitement and positive potential of friendly rivalry 
will be on display next month as we enjoy the 
Commonwealth Games on the Gold Coast, Australia. 
Contributing to the success of the Games, alongside 
athletes and officials, will be thousands of volunteers. 
 
Voluntary effort, by people working as individuals, in 
groups or through larger associations, is so often what 
shapes the Commonwealth and all our communities. By 
pledging to serve the common good in new ways, we can 
ensure that the Commonwealth continues to grow in scope 
and stature, to have an even greater impact on people’s 
lives, today, and for future generations. 
 

I’d also like to make this statement. So earlier today . . . Oh 
sorry. Be seated. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on Question of Privilege 
 
The Speaker: — Earlier today, the Opposition House Leader 
raised a question of privilege. Under the provisions of rule 12 of 
the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, I received the notice this morning, Tuesday, 
March the 13th, 2018, at 10:53 a.m. Upon receipt of this notice, 
in accordance with the rules, both House leaders are aware of 
the details of the case and the proposed question of privilege. It 
is the responsibility of the Speaker to determine if a prima facie 
case of privilege has been established. 

Contempt of the Assembly is a serious charge, which requires 
careful examination of the case and this Assembly’s practices 
and precedents. The minister has apologized to the Assembly 
and I will consider this apology in my decision. However I’ve 
not had sufficient time to carefully consider all matters related 
to this question, so for this reason I shall defer my ruling. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Membership of the Board of Internal Economy 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to inform the Assembly that a 
message from the Lieutenant Governor has been received 
stating effective February the 6th, 2018 that the membership of 
the Board of Internal Economy was the Speaker, Chair; Hon. 
Jeremy Harrison; Hon. Paul Merriman; Hon. Greg Brkich; and 
MLAs Dan D’Autremont, David Forbes, and Warren McCall. 
 

Vacancy in Regina Northeast Constituency 
 
The Speaker: — Further, I would like to inform the Assembly 
of the vacancy in the constituency of Regina Northeast due to 
the resignation of Mr. Kevin Doherty. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 115 — The Residential Tenancies 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I rise today to move second reading of 
The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017. We are proud 
that in Saskatchewan the vast majority of tenancy agreements 
are amicable and respectful. In the cases where they are not, 
however, they have recourse to the able women and men of the 
Office of Residential Tenancies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the goal of the government with The Residential 
Tenancies Act, 2006 is to provide balance and neutrality 
between the rights and obligations of landlords and the rights 
and obligations of tenants. 
 
We have become aware of some provisions of the legislation 
that provides some rights without concurrent obligations. Other 
provisions have proven troublesome. These amendments will 
make adjustments to bring the legislation to balance between 
rights of tenants and rights of landlords. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the significant amendments is the 
amendment to section 22.1 which ensures that landlords may 
establish reasonable rules prohibiting the possession, use, 
selling, or distribution of cannabis, or the growing and 
possession of cannabis plants in the rental unit. 
 
The announcement by the federal government that possession, 
use, selling, and growing of cannabis will be allowed in certain 
circumstances by the summer of 2018, has caused concern for 
many people, including landlords. They are worried with the 



3378 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

potential effect on other tenants in multi-family housing. As 
well, for single-family premises, there may be insurance issues 
that the landlord will need to take into consideration. Although 
the landlords already have the right to make reasonable rules, 
this amendment ensures that rules relating to cannabis are 
available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are two amendments to section 70 regarding 
the powers of hearing officers. The first amendment clarifies a 
practice that has been ongoing for many years, which is to 
include rent arrears in an order for damages awarded to a 
landlord. The second amendment equalizes treatment between 
landlords and tenants who fail to comply with an order made by 
the office. Once this is in place, both landlords and tenants will 
be at risk of having subsequent applications declined if they 
have not complied with an order made pursuant to the Act. 
 
The next amendment, Mr. Speaker, deals with appeals from 
orders that issue writs of possession to landlords for tenants’ 
failure to pay rent. These are, in the colloquial terminology, 
eviction orders for non-payment of rent. The current appeal 
provision, section 72, allows appeals on questions of law or 
jurisdiction. It provides that in order for a tenant to appeal an 
eviction order for non-payment of rent, the tenant must either 
deposit one-half of one month’s rent with the court or prove to 
the local registrar that the rent in fact has been paid. 
 
The new provision eliminates the deposit with the court and 
simply requires that the rent continues to be paid. This again 
balances the right of the tenant to appeal with the right of the 
landlord to be paid for the occupation of the premises. It will 
also end the rare but highly publicized incidents of tenants who 
use the appeal process to prolong their stay in the premises 
without paying their rent. This strategy is highly unfair to 
landlords and has been the subject of critical media stories 
throughout Canada. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, amendments are being made to section 85 
dealing with the personal property abandoned by tenants when 
they leave a tenancy situation. If these tenants have chosen to 
leave their low-value property behind instead of dealing with it, 
landlords become responsible for disposing of it. Currently 
landlords may not sell or destroy it, no matter what the value, 
without an order from the Office of Residential Tenancies. 
Although these officers are made relatively quickly, they still 
cause delay in re-renting the property. 
 
The amendment, Mr. Speaker, will permit the landlord to deal 
with the abandoned property without an order from the Office 
of Residential Tenancies if the value of the property is below 
$1,500. This will ease the process for landlords immensely 
without causing significant hardship to tenants. Incidentally, it 
will also ease the workload of the Office of Residential 
Tenancies in dealing with these orders, which is significant. 
Any proceeds are paid to the Office of Residential Tenancies 
for the tenant to claim. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we feel that these amendments will help make the 
process fair and equitable for both landlords and tenants. Mr. 
Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 

Bill 115. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize 
the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to stand in my place today to give, as I’ve done on 
numerous occasions, to give the opposition’s perspective on 
bills as they’re being introduced by the Saskatchewan Party 
government, Mr. Speaker, and I want to speak briefly about the 
history of some of the bills that the Saskatchewan Party has 
brought to the Assembly, everything from the CCS carbon tax 
that they’ve imposed on families and farms and businesses 
throughout Saskatchewan, yet that’s certainly a complete 
failure. The fact that they had a billion-dollar tax hike last year, 
Mr. Speaker, and the fact that after a number of years with the 
Sask Party at the helm we’ve had record revenue the first five 
years of their tenure as a government, and now, Mr. Speaker, 
after 10 years we have record debt. 
 
So how do you translate record revenue into record debt, Mr. 
Speaker, and future debt? Well leave it to the Tory math 
wizards on that end of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to figure out 
how you take a province that has record revenue, a booming 
economy, a growing population, and now we’re faced with 
record debt. And, Mr. Speaker, the future looks bleak under the 
Saskatchewan Party government and that’s why it’s really 
important, that’s why it’s really important that the people of 
Saskatchewan pay very close attention to what the Sask Party’s 
doing, not just to the fact that they have this debt that’s 
climbing up every single day that they’re in power, Mr. 
Speaker, that future generations will have to pay. 
 
This is why politics is important. This is why scrutiny of bills 
that are being brought forward, Mr. Speaker, is also very, very 
important, and that’s why this particular bill, Bill No. 115, The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, we have to pay very 
close attention to that, Mr. Speaker, because obviously there are 
changes in there for the relationship between the landlord and 
certainly someone that is leasing an apartment off that particular 
owner. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the intent behind some of these bills is so 
very important that we have to take the time to reach out to 
various groups and organizations that may be impacted by these 
bills. And I’ll give you a perfect example, Mr. Speaker. It’d be 
very interesting to do the analysis of how much the carbon 
capture sequestration plan, the carbon capture tax being 
imposed by the Sask Party, how it’s going to affect businesses 
and families and the farm community throughout the province. 
As we’re paying for the carbon capture sequestration project, 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are paying that bill. 
We’re paying it on our power bills, and so the carbon capture 
tax is compliments of the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then they talk about the federal imposed carbon tax, so 
what I think is happening here, Mr. Speaker, is that they are . . . 
they don’t want no competition from anyone under the carbon 
tax scenario. They’re the ones that want to impose a carbon tax, 
Mr. Speaker, on the people of Saskatchewan, called a CCS 
strategy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I wouldn’t mind doing an analysis of what they’re making 
Saskatchewan farms and families and businesses pay for their 
carbon capture tax versus what they are proposing the federal 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3379 

government is doing. And once the analysis is done, Mr. 
Speaker, then I think it’s important for the people of 
Saskatchewan to be advised how the analysis comes out, and 
we’re certainly going to do that, you know, from our end as 
well. So the intent of some of these bills, as indicated, it’s 
really, really important to show exactly what the Saskatchewan 
Party is trying to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now under Bill 115, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated, it is 
important on every single bill that the Saskatchewan Party 
brings forward that we allow it as much scrutiny as possible, 
that we as an opposition have to network with those being 
impacted. And we also have to at times really begin to try and 
assess who the winner is and who the loser is and really if there 
is the opportunity, to balance those interests. 
 
As the senior government within Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s important to always look at the interests of all people being 
impacted by the legislation to make sure that balance is 
achieved. My point in the history of the CCS carbon capture tax 
being imposed by the Saskatchewan Party is that the 
messengers have long had a history of betraying Saskatchewan 
people and then simply deflecting to other governments so that 
they’re able to cover up their mismanagement, scandal, and 
waste, Mr. Speaker, and more importantly, the increased taxes 
that the people of Saskatchewan pay each and every day 
because of that mismanagement, because of that waste, and 
because of the scandal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:45] 
 
So I think it’s really important that we hear the messenger and 
make sure that we reflect the history of some of the other bills 
being brought forward and how they weakly try to deflect, Mr. 
Speaker, of how they weakly try to deflect from their miserable 
record, Mr. Speaker, as a government. And this is what we’re 
seeing evidence of today. There is a complete lack of 
leadership. There has been a history of bringing forward bills 
and then certainly trying to circumvent the good intentions of 
many people that do participate in the design of these bills by 
bringing forward their taxation processes, and certainly trying 
to cover up for their mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 
 
And this is a good example, Mr. Speaker, of why it’s important 
to look at these bills, to understand who is presenting this bill. 
It’s a Saskatchewan Party bill so the opposition’s going to get 
up and they’re going to provide every bill every opportunity to 
scrutinize exactly what’s going on when it comes to the 
Saskatchewan Party government because, Mr. Speaker, the art 
of deflection, the art of deflection employed by the 
Saskatchewan Party right now is not working. The people of 
Saskatchewan are simply not buying it anymore. They see this 
party do it time and time and time and time again. 
 
And that day is coming, Mr. Speaker, where that arrogance is 
going to be . . . There’ll be a price imposed on that arrogance, 
Mr. Speaker. And one of the biggest, greatest challenges we 
have in Saskatchewan is that future governments — and I dare 
say the NDP is going to be a future government, Mr. Speaker 
— that they will have to once again clean up the mess, clean up 
the mess. And that’s why it is important that we pay attention to 
bills like Bill 115, because, Mr. Speaker, it is a huge financial 
mess that’s being created by the province right now, and people 

of Saskatchewan know that. 
 
So as much as they get up and they start trying to deflect and 
change the channel, Mr. Speaker, our job as the opposition is to 
make sure and to remind people, to remind people exactly the 
damage that the Saskatchewan Party’s doing to the province of 
Saskatchewan. And notwithstanding the theatrics of the 
members opposite in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we know, we 
know that at the end of the day the interests of the 
Saskatchewan people are not being maintained by the 
Saskatchewan Party. And they continue using the politics of 
deflection while not dealing with the real issues that are 
challenging people right across this great province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, under The Residential Tenancies 
Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of changes that 
affect people that rent units. And I’m assuming the vast 
majority of these rental units we’re talking about are 
apartments. Now, Mr. Speaker, there may be other 
arrangements such as housing and so on and so forth. 
 
So again you’ve got to go back on the history of the party 
proposing these amendments and these changes. And right 
away there’s a lot of mistrust by a lot of people, especially those 
most vulnerable, especially those most vulnerable, in making 
sure that their interests are being maintained, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s certainly something that ought to be in the back of every 
leader in this province’s mind. And I think it’s very paramount 
to how we think that as a society or as a government or as a 
legislator, Mr. Speaker, we have to incorporate in our mind how 
is this going to affect and impact the most vulnerable people in 
our province. 
 
That should drive, many times, our thought process. That 
should drive, Mr. Speaker, our planning process and that should 
be in our minds every single day as we do these bills, as we 
move forward, Mr. Speaker. And again I go back to the history 
of the Saskatchewan Party and the miserable way in which 
they’ve managed this province, Mr. Speaker. And at the end of 
the day, the future generations will pay the price and the people 
of Saskatchewan will find out exactly how they have 
squandered record revenue and to this day have put the 
Saskatchewan people under record debt. It doesn’t make any 
sense how we go from record revenue to record debt, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to 
scrutinize what the Saskatchewan Party do on every single bill, 
as I’ve mentioned time and time again. 
 
Now under this bill, Mr. Speaker, as I look to the bill itself, the 
bill really accomplishes four main things. And I want to talk 
about some of the areas that the bill covers. 
 
First of all I’m assuming, Mr. Speaker, that there’s been good 
robust discussions with both impacted groups, the landlords 
who will obviously, or the people that own the properties — 
could be landlady I guess, to be fair . . . The people that own 
these properties, that rent these properties to a great number of 
people, Mr. Speaker — and I’m one of them that rented an 
apartment here in the city — it’s important to know that they 
have the ultimate cost of maintaining the building, paying the 
mortgage, to ensuring that the building is safe and secure. 
 



3380 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

It is indeed a great amount of responsibility and thus and 
therefore they should also be receiving their duly compensation 
for people living in these units, as of course this is not a free 
service. And I think people understand that. And certainly from 
our perspective we look at the landlords throughout the 
province. They have had some significant, some significant 
advantages to offer people that can’t afford their own home, and 
certainly those that are moving to the city and are transitioning 
to home ownership eventually. Those services are really 
important that we . . . We certainly understand the incredible 
value they offer the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So some of the bill’s main thrust, Mr. Speaker, it gives 
landlords new powers to make rules, and I quote, “. . . 
prohibiting the possession, use, selling or distribution of 
cannabis or the growing or possession of cannabis [plants] . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, it also gives the Office of Residential Tenancies, 
the ORT hearing officers new powers to refuse to allow an 
application from a tenant who is in contravention of an ORT 
order. Now what that means, Mr. Speaker, is if I have an ORT 
order against me and you’re my landlord, I cannot delay the 
process nor can I abuse the process by turning around and 
challenging you back. I think clearly it’s got to be an 
understanding that the few that may want to abuse the privilege 
that we have in appealing some of these decisions, Mr. Speaker, 
this really hurts the cause overall in building a solid relationship 
between the tenant and of course the landlord. 
 
So I think what’s happened with that particular process, Mr. 
Speaker, the officers now have new abilities to refuse an order 
to appeal a decision by the ORT from tenants that may be in 
contravention of the rules. Mr. Speaker, during all the appeal 
processes, tenants have to continue to pay their rent for the 
duration of the appeal process when they are arguing against an 
ORT decision. And, Mr. Speaker, they also have the right to 
grant the landlord possession of a rental unit for rent arrears. 
That’s also another important factor, one of the three issues that 
are being considered, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Finally, the final part of the bill, it allows landlords to dispose 
of property worth less than $1,500 without an order from the 
ORT, when the tenancy ends or if the property is abandoned. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are many examples that I would think 
offhand. Obviously there are many times where tenants will 
leave an old couch or a bed or a dresser behind. Either they’re 
abandoning that unit or abandoning that item. I think it’s 
important that many times the landlord has the responsibility of 
cleaning up the unit and disposing of any unwanted furnishings 
and so on and so forth. 
 
So the new change in the bill allows the landlord to dispose of 
that property of less than $1,500. Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got 
to be very careful on some of the issues that may come into 
play. As an example, there may be a spouse leaving a domestic 
violence matter, that they maybe suddenly have to leave. Is that 
process being incorporated into this? Is there a relationship that 
could be achieved when we have those kinds of circumstances, 
Mr. Speaker? There’s a big significant difference in how the 
landlords, by and large, are very, very responsible landlords. 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are times when, yes, certain tenants 
will leave behind an old dresser or an old bed. They obviously 
understand that they’re throwing that unit away, and it’s always 

the responsibility of the landlord to clean up that suite so others 
could use it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there is a significant difference between a 
$50 dresser drawer, Mr. Speaker, or a $100 bed, versus a 
$1,000 TV. There’s got to be some kind of an understanding. 
There’s got to be some kind of a process that makes sure that, at 
the end of the day, that if there’s something of significant value, 
that the tenant themselves and the landlord should be able to 
work out a deal where they’re not leaving some of these really, 
really expensive assets behind for a reason of domestic violence 
or it was borrowed from someone or there was a sudden 
passing. All of these matters need to be taken into account. 
 
So finally, Mr. Speaker, as I wrap up my comments around Bill 
115, The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, 
in northern Saskatchewan there was a great opportunity under a 
housing initiative that really talked about The Residential 
Tenancies Act overall, where working families were allowed to 
own their own home after a period of time. And what happened 
in 2012 was the then minister of Housing — I’m not sure if I 
can offer her name, but the Hon. June Draude — that decided to 
cancel the option of families owning their own home and 
withdrawing through the Sask Housing Corporation that ability 
for families to purchase their home. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that was the biggest slight to northern 
Saskatchewan families because, as we all know, in order for us 
to have successful families, in order to have very nurturing 
environment for children, you’ve got to have a decent home, 
Mr. Speaker. You’ve got to have home ownership. That’s so 
bloody important, so vitally important to the future of any 
family. And the opportunity to own the home in northern 
Saskatchewan where’s a limited housing market, Mr. Speaker, 
that was ripped away by the then minister of Housing and the 
Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. And I say to them in this 
Assembly, shame on them. Shame on them because this 
could’ve helped a lot of families. It could have helped a lot of 
families. 
 
And the vision attached to this at that time was to make sure 
that we strengthen families to the extent where they’re strong 
and resilient for years to come. And the Saskatchewan Party, in 
their very limited, very limited wisdom, decided to rip away 
that opportunity. And I say to them, shame on them again. And 
shame on that minister for making that decision at that time 
because it was nothing more than petty politics, Mr. Speaker, in 
the fact that they didn’t understand northern Saskatchewan 
communities. They didn’t understand northern Saskatchewan 
families. They didn’t understand that northern Saskatchewan 
people, like the rest of the province, wanted the opportunity to 
own their own home, as the rest of the province enjoyed 74 per 
cent ownership, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a third of that in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And this is the reason I say to people today, when it comes to 
housing and taking care of your families through decent, good, 
affordable housing, you do not trust the Saskatchewan Party, 
and we need to fight them every single day and every step of 
the way. And that’s why it’s important to continue to pay 
attention to the bills of this sort because anything to do with 
housing and families and building a future, we don’t trust the 
Saskatchewan Party government in any way, shape, or form. In 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3381 

fact we’re prepared to fight on every front. And this is why 
scrutiny of any bills they bring forward, it needs to happen, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So on that note, I have much more to say on other bills, and I’ll 
certainly take the opportunity to do so, but I move that we 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 115, The Residential Tenancies 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 115, The Residential Tenancies 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 94 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cox that Bill No. 94 — The 
Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings 
(SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And while I’m on my 
feet I want to congratulate you on your new role. I feel like I 
might be a little rusty in doing second readings, but you’re new, 
so we’ll get through this together. 
 
I do rise today to speak to Bill No. 94, and for those who might 
not remember, that is the Saskatchewan advantages grant for 
education savings, otherwise known as SAGES, amendment 
Act in 2017. And, Mr. Speaker, sometimes we use euphemistic 
language. In this case, the amendment Act means the 
suspension of that program. 
 
This program provided Saskatchewan families with a matching 
grant of up to $250 when they saved money in an RESP 
[registered education savings plan] for their students to put 
towards a post-secondary education. This was one of many 
decisions that we saw in the last budget that really . . . I think 
budgets really show where your values are, Mr. Speaker. And 
this was a budget that took a real aim at education in our 
province, both at the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] level, 
but also at the post-secondary level. And this was one of those 
decisions. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Just as a recount, Mr. Speaker, this was not the only direct cut 
to post-secondary education or the only impact on families who 
might be looking to save for post-secondary education. This 
represented a $7.6 million cut with the suspension of SAGES 
[Saskatchewan advantage grant for education savings], and in 
order to make this cut I believe there was a $60,000 expenditure 
that went along with cutting this program for families around 

the province — and this at a time when families see increasing 
pressure on wages and on their ability to pay bills in the 
province, and it’s increasingly difficult to save money for 
post-secondary education. 
 
Unfortunately Saskatchewan has the second-highest rates of 
university tuition in the country. Having a child in grade 12 and 
one in grade 10, this is a reality that’s all too real for people. So 
when they’re looking at where to send their students, of course 
we would love for our students to stay here at our 
post-secondary institutions. But decisions around funding and 
underfunding of our universities, coupled with a tax on 
families’ abilities to save for their children’s post-secondary 
education, makes that increasingly difficult, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there’s a quote that I’d like to enter into the record here 
that I think is important because again, budgets being about 
values, but they also shouldn’t be about just short-term 
decisions. They should take the long term into account as well. 
There are a lot of places that you can cut today that might end 
up costing a whole lot more in the future, and I think education 
maybe is foremost amongst those. So the quote is this, Mr. 
Speaker: “If you think education is expensive, you should try 
ignorance.” 
 
And I’m afraid that there were some decisions made with this 
last budget that really, really do question the long-term planning 
and the value that this government places on education. I know 
that there are a lot of nice words around how much education is 
valued, and young people and keeping young people here. But 
words, if you don’t back them up, are just that. They’re just 
fancy words. 
 
And if we see increasing cuts to education, in post-secondary 
education, while we say we value it, we value education, Mr. 
Speaker, it really does beg the question: what are people to 
believe? I think “actions speak louder than words” is another 
quote that I didn’t coin but I think is appropriate in this 
instance. 
 
And this was a rather short-lived program that had good uptake 
in the province, introduced actually only in 2014 by this 
government. The SAGES program was introduced with rather 
large fanfare and a lot of those nice words that we’ve been 
talking about. I’m just going to read a couple of quotes into the 
record here, from the then minister, Mr. Norris, who noted: 
 

To support our government’s Plan for Growth [because 
education is integral to growth], we want to ensure more 
students have the opportunity to pursue a post-secondary 
education. SAGES will help achieve this by encouraging 
families to plan for their children’s future and promoting 
the importance of completing post-secondary education. 

 
Mr. Speaker, apparently that is only believed in the good times. 
When times get tough, education and support for education 
seems to be one of the first things to go. And that’s really, it’s 
more than disappointing. I think it’s long term on the unwise 
side, both economically but also in terms of the wrong signal 
sending to people in the province, particularly our young 
people. 
 
I want to give a little bit of a highlight to the great work that 



3382 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

does happen despite some unstable and underfunding, chronic 
underfunding, of our universities. Things like the Global 
Institute for Water Security, an interdisciplinary program at the 
U of S, these are world-class programs. These are exactly the 
type of diversification and things that we should be promoting 
in this province as we look forward to the next several decades. 
Interdisciplinary, tech sector, teaching critical thought and 
problem-solving skills, these are all things that are learned at 
. . . agricultural innovation, which this province is known for — 
these are all things that happen at our universities. And we’re in 
peril of going backwards on that when we make decisions like 
this, when we restrict access to post-secondary education for 
students and when we also, when we underfund our 
post-secondary education institutes. 
 
So this program, SAGES, offered as I noted a grant of 10 per 
cent of subscriber contributions to a maximum of $250 a year, 
to a lifetime maximum of $4,500 which, Mr. Speaker, is almost 
. . . which is a year’s tuition in many institutions. Not in 
Saskatchewan anymore because again our rates of tuition keep 
climbing, but it’s more or less a year of tuition, and that makes 
a big difference to many families. 
 
I know when our kids were little, I was working part-time and it 
was one of the . . . One thing we were able to do for our kids 
was put some money aside for their education. And I tell you, 
I’m pretty happy that we did that now when we’re looking at 
the oldest going into engineering. She has options because we 
were able to put money in that savings plan that, frankly, a lot 
of families without that option simply . . . a lot of students 
wouldn’t have without some of those supports. 
 
Not only does it play the role of saving them money, but it also 
draws attention to the importance of saving money for families. 
And it’s a little bit of . . . There’s an educational piece about 
how investing little bits over the course of your child’s life 
starting from a young age actually, you know, multiplies; the 
benefit multiplies. And by the time they’re in university, you’re 
able to provide them with some support. 
 
I’m going to read another quote by one of the then people 
working within, the Minister of State in social development, 
Candice Bergen, who said this at the time: 
 

We recognize the challenges that families face in saving 
for their children’s education. That’s why our government 
is proud to invest in future generations through initiatives 
such as the RESP, the Canada Learning Bond, and the 
CESG. 

 
Again, a similar type of program to SAGES. And that is the 
case. Families do have difficulty saving for post-secondary 
education. And this was just one more hit both to families in 
this province in this last budget but also, as I’ve noted several 
times, a hit to education. 
 
Looking at further reductions in the last budget for education, a 
5.8 per cent reduction, $44 million; a 5 per cent reduction to 
base funding for post-secondary education; 5.4 million for the 
U of R alone, that followed for the second time in a row a $1.66 
million mid-year reduction. If you can imagine that, Mr. 
Speaker, having your budget set for the year and two years in a 
row having your budget clawed back at mid-year because 

frankly someone else failed to plan. 
 
And as has been mentioned before, you know, universities don’t 
have the same options that governments do. So this is a burden 
that’s foisted on our post-secondary educational institutions 
mid-year and they’re left to pick up the pieces. And frankly, 
those costs and that uncertainty gets passed down to students. 
And it really does weaken our post-secondary educational 
institutions and I think, Mr. Speaker, that is completely 
wrong-headed and short-sighted. 
 
I’m just going to look for a quote here from Vianne Timmons at 
the time. I may have to bring it closer to my eyes, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The cuts to scholarships and student aid will make it that 
much harder to afford for those enrolled in classes and the 
elimination of the Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for 
Education Savings means that parents saving for their 
child’s education are going to be paying more when their 
child starts post-secondary education. 

 
So already we’ve seen a reduction to grants and awards. 
 

Branching off of this, Vianne Timmons’ email stated that 
this is “obviously disappointing” and that “more critically, 
the cuts ignore the affordability challenges facing students 
and neglect the significant economic and social benefits of 
post-secondary education.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is what happens when you look at things like 
education simply as an expense. This is an investment. It is one 
of the wisest investments that we can make as a province, as a 
society. And it is an investment that this government 
unfortunately has failed to make and chose to, in fact, put first 
on the chopping block in this province when times turned 
downwards. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I think, I know that others of my 
colleagues will have comments on this bill but I think I have 
come to the end of my own comments and I will move to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 94. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Lakeview has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 94, The Saskatchewan Advantage 
Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 95 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 95 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I too would like 
to join my colleagues in wishing you well in your election as 
Speaker. I’m confident you will serve us all to the best of your 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3383 

ability and actually make us very proud of your work in the 
Chair. So I’m glad that you stepped forward and put your name. 
Kind of an exciting time with seven choices there, but I’m glad 
that you were able to come out on top and I’m confident that 
you’ll do a great job. I also wanted to thank my own colleague 
from Riversdale for stepping up too. It means a lot. And all the 
other ones too. Being Speaker is a very, very important position 
in our legislature, in our democracy, so here’s to your future 
achievements as Speaker. 
 
But I wanted to join in today in talking about Bill No. 95, An 
Act to repeal and amend miscellaneous Statutes and make 
consequential amendments to certain Statutes. It’s always 
interesting — I look forward to this bill every year to see what 
is coming forward, what from the Justice department they’ve 
decided needs to . . . no longer is relevant, no longer serves its 
purpose, in fact could be confusing or detrimental to the 
application of law here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And this is an interesting group of candidates that we have 
before us. Some, I have to say, are real heroes; what they did in 
terms of developing Saskatchewan is truly, truly amazing. And 
others are some real dogs, some that should never have seen the 
light of day. And in fact sometimes when we ask where did the 
money go, we’ll definitely see. Yes, we’ll see where the money 
went. But I save that for later because I want to talk about the 
good work first. 
 
And the one that . . . there’s a couple here that I think are very, 
very interesting that were amazing pieces of legislation that 
were brought forward, and one was The Rural Electrification 
Act, is now being repealed. And in fact I think this is a kind of 
thing, particularly in a rural province like our own, really is an 
outstanding piece of legislation that really brought forward rural 
homes and farms and communities into the 20th century and the 
work that was done around the ’30s and the ’40s. 
 
And you know, when I was looking it up and, you know, there 
was a rural electrification bill for the United States, 
Saskatchewan, I think probably right across North America. It 
was a real period of change. And that is a bill that I think is 
really pretty special and we’re sad to see . . . well not sad. I 
guess we get sentimental about the good work that was done. It 
probably has outlasted its usefulness, but I don’t know if they 
have a wall of fame up there with good bills that we should be 
proud of. And this is one that I would nominate to say that’s 
one of the top bills we should be . . . I think that it’s something 
that we should be thinking about when we do legislation, not as 
we’ve seen this side. I mean it’s going to be interesting when in 
years future . . . I mean they’re already . . . And I’ll get to the 
one where they’re already throwing out past legislation that 
they’ve created, they know was a dog. 
 
But the other one I want to talk about which is so interesting, 
especially in the debate that we had today in question period, it 
was around The Home Energy Loan Act. And of course The 
Home Energy Loan Act was created in 1978, and it’s interesting 
what was happening in the ’70s in terms of energy 
conservation. And it was caused because of the high price of oil 
at that time, and some of us may remember those times. 
 
[15:15] 
 

And of course there was a real push on in the ’70s to do 
something about conservation. And I think about Premier 
Blakeney and his visionary approach to governing 
Saskatchewan. And one was about how we need to make sure 
our homes in Saskatchewan were better homes, homes that 
really showed the best in conservation. And so this home 
energy loan Act was about that visionary process that we 
actually see very lacking today with this government, this 
government, when it really has no plan for climate change, has 
no way of addressing the real challenges that we see before us. 
 
And in fact I think of specifically one thing they did that was a 
backwards step was alternate fuel cars that they had. And I 
think the minister of the day that brought it forward was the 
MLA from Silverwood, when he was minister of SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance], had the foresight to 
say, let’s make sure those people get a reduction in their licence 
plates as a nod to say, right on; you should have hybrid or 
alternate energy cars. A few years later though they realized 
that wasn’t doing so well in terms of making cash, so they 
repealed that. And the signal was very much that they’re not in 
favour of that kind of thing, and they repealed that kind of 
work. So there’s big gaps, big question marks about their 
commitment to that kind of thing. 
 
The other one is the Lord’s Day Act, and of course that now, as 
we realize in this day and age that we’re a multi-ethnic 
community, and maybe that’s not as relevant. But it does 
remind me in every . . . I actually get pretty disappointed about 
this when I think about when we repealed The Labour 
Standards Act and took out the weekend. And here we are. It 
always saddens me a little bit about this government’s lack of 
commitment to family and the weekend, and here we have it. 
 
But the one that really is interesting, and I know that members 
over there want to say, what are the dogs, what are the dogs of 
legislation that we’re putting out of their misery? Well one of 
them is the Enterprise Saskatchewan bill. We are putting that 
one out of its misery. And I remember when, I think it was the 
member from Meadow Lake was the . . . Was not the member 
from Meadow Lake the minister? I remember when he thought 
that was the greatest thing since sliced bread; nothing could be 
better than Enterprise Saskatchewan . . . But it really ran havoc 
through the business community right across Saskatchewan. 
Nobody knew what was going on, what was the plan of this 
government. 
 
And of course that was the brainchild of Brad Wall from Swift 
Current, and he thought it was a great idea and was one of his 
major platforms that he brought in when he became premier. 
And now as he’s left just a few short weeks ago, they’re getting 
rid of that legislation. They don’t want to have anything like 
that around. That is a bad dog, bad dog. When there’s 
something rotten in Denmark, like Enterprise Saskatchewan, 
you’ve got to get it out the door. And so here we are. 
 
You know, I’ve just got to say when I look and I read it, it’s not 
just us, but this was the premier’s pet project. So I know for 
them over there, it must have been interesting when Justice 
says, we’ve got to get rid of this thing as soon as we can. Like 
they couldn’t wait for the premier to get out the door, because I 
know the premier signed off, Premier Brad Wall signed off on 
this piece of legislation to say it just was a dumb idea and I’m 



3384 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

sorry that we spent . . . I would like to know how much of all 
the money did they spend on Enterprise Saskatchewan. How 
much was that? What did that great idea cost? You know, in . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . You know, it’s like those guys over 
there, they’ve only got one or two answers, you know? You’ve 
got to talk to them about their heckling. Make it a little bit more 
interesting, you know. 
 
Today we heard about the 2016 election campaign, and those 
guys have the nerve to stand up and lecture us on the 2016 
election campaign. Look at the last two budgets that we’ve seen 
from them. How do they have any, any courage at all to talk 
about money management? 
 
But this is what Bruce Johnstone had to say about that dog, 
Enterprise Saskatchewan. In 2007, Bruce Johnstone wrote for 
the Leader-Post, and I quote, “Enterprise Saskatchewan, 
Premier-elect Brad . . .” Well this was before. “Premier-elect 
Brad Wall’s vision of how to manage the province’s economic 
development could be the biggest achievement of his 
administration, or it could be his biggest flop.” Well it looks 
like it’s heading for the dust bin, and the House Leader and all 
those folks, it’s going to be interesting when they vote in favour 
of that. And we’ll have to just let the former premier, Brad 
Wall, know that we just ixnayed on that little thing called 
Enterprise Saskatchewan. So I think it’s pretty clear where we 
landed on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so at this point, I know many of my colleagues will want to 
have comment on this for a bit. It’s a very interesting piece of 
legislation. So with that, I would move adjournment on Bill No. 
95. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
adjourned debate on Bill No. 95, The Miscellaneous Statutes 
Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 96 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 96 — The Choice 
of Court Agreements (Hague Convention Implementation) 
Act/Loi sur les accords d’élection de for (mise en œuvre de la 
Convention de La Haye) be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
might I join my colleagues in first off starting with a word of 
congratulations to yourself and many happy returns of the day 
in terms of the work set out before you serving this Assembly, 
gainsaying the rights and responsibilities of we, the members of 
this Legislative Assembly. We wish you the best in all of that. 
 
And now I will not tempt your inclination to call me to order or 
anything like that; I’ll just try and stay on the straight and 
narrow here. But I do so in the certainty that you’ll get me back 

on the path should I require that help, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I’m interested in joining the debate here today, and 
particularly, you know, sometimes you get choice spots in the 
batting order. Coming after a bill like The Miscellaneous 
Statutes Repeal Act, I’d, you know, I’d want to attach myself 
with a nail to the remarks from the member from Saskatoon 
Centre in terms of . . . That’s one for the Hall of Fame, for sure. 
And again to think that, here we are in our place in the cosmos, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re here when they’re putting down Enterprise 
Saskatchewan. And, you know, again there’s no word on what 
sort of auction they’ve held for the uniforms that they had along 
with that. There’s no word on what happened to the Starship 
Enterprise. It’s perhaps pushing the outer limits of this 
government’s legacy ever further. Maybe it wound up in the 
scrap heap. I don’t know where that wound up, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s no word on the 30 years of risk that attached to that, but 
I’m sure that they managed SaskBuilds into that. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, the mind wanders. You think about, 
you know, where were you? Where were you when they 
introduced The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal Act and it 
contained a provision to put down Enterprise Saskatchewan? 
Finally, repeal that legislation. And we of course, Mr. Speaker, 
can say, where were we? Here we were. We were looking on in 
amazement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again, coming in this spot from the batting order, to move 
from a heady topic like that on to Bill No. 96, The Choice of 
Court Agreements (Hague Convention Implementation) Act, I 
mean it’s a bit of a letdown, frankly. You know, anti-climactic I 
think would be the way some might term it, Mr. Speaker. But 
certainly I don’t know if they’re ever going to get taken to The 
Hague to adjudicate the great works like the Enterprise 
Saskatchewan. You never know. You never know. The future is 
not ours to see, but que sera, sera. Oh, I hear the member from 
Saskatoon south, the Attorney General. He’s currently the 
Attorney General; I’m getting that right? That’s right. He is, 
and of course the person that introduced this legislation to the 
Assembly. I don’t know what else he’d . . . I don’t know what 
personal insights he’d be able to bring to us about the goings-on 
at The Hague, but you know, they were absent from his second 
reading speech, which was again — not unlike my spot in the 
batting order — a bit of a letdown, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in terms of the member bringing forward this legislation, 
and again putting The Hague firmly on the radar for 
Saskatchewan legal proceedings, getting with the program like 
that, again you just think, well, you know, yet again the Sask 
Party’s put us on the map, put us well on the globe. You know, 
Google’s going to be coming around to film us sometime soon, 
I’m sure. I don’t know if they’re going to send a drone or if 
they’re going to send Mr. Google or how they’re going to do 
that, but it’s going to be interesting to be sure. 
 
But again, I’m also sort of saddened by the fact that there’s . . . 
One of the more insightful observers of the economy and 
society in Saskatchewan, Bruce Johnstone, he of course had 
something to say about Enterprise Saskatchewan. And again, 
there’s no reference as to whether or not that hit the Lifetime 
Achievement Award that Bruce Johnstone was given by the 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
commenting on, you know, maybe Enterprise Saskatchewan, 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3385 

biggest accomplishment for the then member from Swift 
Current, Brad Wall, or perhaps the biggest flop. There’s no 
word on whether or not the Hague Convention legislation that’s 
been brought here, Mr. Speaker, no word on Mr. Johnstone’s 
thoughts on this particular piece of legislation, but I’m sure it’s 
fine. 
 
It does bring to mind the adage that history’s a bit of a hanging 
judge. History’s a bit of a hanging judge. I don’t know if, you 
know, that judge sits at The Hague or where precisely, but in 
terms of greatest success or biggest flop, I think the jury’s 
coming in on the old Enterprise Saskatchewan. And again . . . 
but I stand here in a bit of jealousy for my spot in the batting 
order and the fine speech given by my colleague, the member 
from Saskatoon Centre. 
 
But certainly they keep referring to the Attorney General’s 
second reading speech on The Choice of Court Agreements 
(Hague Convention Implementation) Act wherein the Minister 
of Justice states: 
 

This proposed uniform bill provides for the 
implementation of the Hague Convention on Choice of 
Court Agreements. This convention establishes rules for 
parties to an international contract from participating 
nations to choose the court jurisdiction where disputes 
under the contract are to be determined. Mr. Speaker, 
supporting choice of court provisions in international 
contracts will . . . prevent litigation in multiple 
jurisdictions where a dispute arises in an international 
contract. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, it sort of, you know, makes the mind 
wander in terms of what sort of application this will have in 
terms of the international agreements that we’ve entered into 
under SaskBuilds with different global consortia and the sort of 
song and dance and the line that we’ve been sold around P3s 
and how this is going to set us all free. Vinci — see you in The 
Hague. I don’t know. I don’t know. I don’t know if that’s the 
prompt for this or if we’re just trying to keep up to Ontario. 
Because of course, you know, you can’t be too far behind them. 
 
But I guess the other interesting thing would be, you know, 
maybe we could keep up on the accounting practices on offer in 
a place like, oh, I don’t know, Manitoba, friendly Manitoba. 
Friendly Manitoba where, you know . . . And just to show how 
non-partisan we are, guess who’s in government there, Mr. 
Speaker? It’s a Conservative government. The Conservative 
government did the math, ran the numbers, and it turns out — 
P3s, not such a great deal for the people of Manitoba. But of 
course they had yet to buy wholesale the Kool-Aid tanker that 
the members opposite have, you know, apparently brought 
home to share for all that are interested here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
[15:30] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, how that relates to the Hague Convention and 
the choice of courts that are now on offer, we’ll . . . The future’s 
not ours to see, but who knows, who knows what junctions 
that’s going to be showing up in. But I know other of my 
colleagues have got much more informed opinions on these 
matters than I, Mr. Speaker. So with that I’d move to adjourn 

debate on Bill No. 96, The Choice of Court Agreements (Hague 
Convention Implementation) Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 96, The Choice of 
Court Agreements (Hague Convention Implementation) Act. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 97 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 97 — The 
Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Bill 97, I guess 
a little bit of an understanding . . . But before I comment on the 
bill and get into it, I just want to say congratulations to yourself 
as being elected to Speaker to represent us. And with that I will 
say thank you and wish you luck on your duties. 
 
Having said that going in, I think the Act that’s coming into 
play and being amended is going to . . . We know that some 
people go through disputes, whether it’s a child custody, 
divorce, property — there’s many areas where sometimes we 
have to use the courts’ services to get to a settlement. 
 
And my understanding of what’s being amended in here is 
going to give provisions now for arbitration, where you will 
have a process where . . . Right now you see — and maybe on 
billboards and stuff you’ve seen where they’re saying 
maintenance — you could go and find a process, you know, that 
mediated disputes with families and different ones. And they 
recommend that you go through it. And I think the court system 
or lawyers had to recommend people go through that process to 
try to, if they could, you know, mediate the dispute and get 
through that process. 
 
If that didn’t work then I guess the last place you would go 
would have been to the court system. And you’d have the judge, 
and I think, my understanding — not being a lawyer, I’m not 
sure — and with the Justice department if this is something 
they’re moving to, if we’re having our court system held up 
with certain cases. 
 
And what my understanding I’ve got from the information 
that’s been shared by the ministry and the minister, there’s areas 
where we can use the arbitration. And I assume that both parties 
must have to agree. But in that agreement the mediator would 
hear both sides of it, and I believe, my understanding, this 
would be binding. And I think we need to ask those questions. 
And my colleagues will be asking that in committee, the critic, 
you know, finding out is it going to be binding. So if people 
agree to go to arbitration, does it mean that whatever the 
arbitrator says, they will have no choice, but they’re forced to. 
Or will there be a mechanism where they could say well no, I’m 
not happy? I still want to go to court. So I think we’ll find that 



3386 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

out in committee, and then that’s it. 
 
But just, you know, to get into a little bit of the areas where 
they could use the arbitration would be in The Children’s Law 
Act, The Family Maintenance Act, the family protection Act, 
The Family Property Act, or a divorce Act. There’s four areas, 
according to what I have here, that they could use arbitration for 
to find, I guess, a settlement. And sometimes I know I’ve had, 
you know, people that I know, friends, and sometimes they’ve 
had a tough time deciding on who’s going to have custody of 
the children and that has been a lengthy court battle sometime. 
And if this process will help with making sure that it’s, you 
know . . . You’re saying it’s arbitration. It’s binding, and a 
mediator would make a recommendation that that would . . . I 
don’t know if that would implement. If it was to go to court, a 
judge’s decision saying you’ve gone through this process, or 
we’re saying that they have to go through this process before 
they go to court. 
 
And I know we’re going to have many questions and I think 
these questions could be . . . This is impacting people’s lives 
whether it’s divorce, like I’ve said, which is serious and, you 
know, a couple decide that they’re going to end their marriage 
or their relationship, I think there is a provision to have 
somebody arbitrate that. And I think it is a good act than to go 
through the courts and lawyers because it can get pretty costly, 
and at the end of the day, certain, you know, disputes could be a 
lengthy court trial. And I think, to be fair, this is giving some an 
opportunity. And I think this is an option and I’m not sure if — 
and we’ll ask in committee. 
 
And I’m curious if it’s going to be binding and would those 
individuals have to go through the arbitration or do they opt out. 
And my understanding, I think, with the previous program that 
was out there where they tried to mediate, I believe my 
understanding is the lawyers would recommend that and try to 
get them to go to mediation. I think in this case we’ll need to 
ask those questions to get the clarification. Is it binding on 
them? Is it their lawyers, you know, from both sides, both 
parties? And it doesn’t matter what area they’re going to 
dispute, like I said, whether it’s a child custody, whether it’s 
maintenance, whether it’s property, whether it’s a divorce. Are 
they going to be binding on them that they have to go through 
that course or their legal counsel has to advise them or 
recommend they go through that process? 
 
So I think overall, looking at it, I think obviously there’s been 
recommendations brought forward. And I don’t know if it’s the 
Law Society, the courts, the Ministry of Justice, if it’s 
individuals — someone obviously made a recommendation to 
bring this forward. And I know my colleagues, the critic for 
Justice will have an opportunity in committee to ask some 
tough questions and to make sure we understand it because, you 
know . . . And I know she’ll do the reaching out then as she will 
have to in her role as the critic. She’ll reach out to individuals 
and probably to some of her colleagues out there that are 
practising and, you know, probably find out exactly why is this 
being brought forward and is it right before we . . . 
 
And if we need to make amendments to it, maybe she’ll find out 
or that she could make some recommendations, changes. And 
we’ve seen how our critic has worked well with the minister to 
make recommendations and we’ve, you know . . . They’ve 

come together sometimes in a positive way when it’s helped a 
situation, to resolve it so that we could pass the legislation and 
protect the citizens, which of course Justice is asked to do. And 
sometimes, you know, they’ve done that. They’ve showed that 
partnership, that they can work together. And I give, you know, 
that credit, that process. 
 
But having said that, again there will be many questions that, 
you know, need to be asked. And I know my colleagues will 
ask those tough questions in the committee. And at this point, 
I’ll allow that process to happen. And I know my colleagues 
have, you know, more questions on other bills that we have to 
. . . But for today, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to adjourn on Bill 
No. 97. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Cumberland has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 97, The Arbitration (Family Dispute 
Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 98 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 98 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) 
Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative diverse (résolution des 
conflits familiaux) de 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s an honour today to stand here to put some discussion, my 
discussions in here with regards to Bill No. 98, The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to also congratulate you on 
your new role. It was an exciting day yesterday with the 
elections and having seven people running for the Speaker role. 
And I believe that is kind of unprecedented. So it was nice to be 
part of history in the making and happy to be here and serve 
with you in our role as Speaker. And I look forward to working 
with you through the next few years. 
 
And I also want to congratulate the three new MLAs that have 
come from the by-elections we had in the break that we had 
between the fall sitting and the spring sitting. And we almost 
have a full house here, but it looks like we’re going to be 
having another by-election coming forward and potentially 
maybe some more. So always an exciting day in the House and 
the legislature here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But again I wanted to put some of my thoughts towards Bill 98. 
And this was brought forward by the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General in the fall session with regards to making 
some changes to the bill here with regards to the family dispute 
resolutions Act. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s really important that we 
regularly take a look at these bills and Acts and make sure that 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3387 

they’re reflective of our times and days that we have here. And 
I think the family dispute resolution Act is a very important 
one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that we have high rates of domestic 
violence within our province. And oftentimes when people are 
ending their relationships, some of those behaviours of 
individuals who are violent or abusive will come forward 
through these times when you’re going through a divorce or a 
separation, and so ensuring that there’s options for individuals 
who are going through a separation is very important. And I 
think ensuring that it’s a timely process is also very important 
because it helps people get through this process and not drag it 
on long. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have said before that prior to being elected in my 
seat here, I worked with men who were abusive, and so I know 
a lot of their personality traits or some of the behaviours that 
they have, you know. And some of that would be about trying 
to make a process like this last a lot longer so that they could 
have control over the person that they’re abusive towards. 
 
I often talk about a male being in that position because that 
tends to be the majority of cases that we see, but it’s not always 
the case. But so oftentimes when I would make reference to that 
I would talk about men who are abusive and women and 
children having to face the situation, being part of this 
relationship and having this control set over them. And 
oftentimes they’ll put in a lot of obstacles within the court 
process so that they can still have control over the relationship 
and the children, and that is part of their behaviours. 
 
And we unfortunately don’t have a lot of services for 
individuals who have this type of issue or situation, and so they 
tend to continue with their behaviours, their negative 
behaviours. And that’s another topic of discussion that could go 
on a lengthy time. And we need to ensure that we have services 
for abusive men as well because the men that I’ve worked with, 
they wanted to learn different ways and they wanted to know 
why they did the things they did. But oftentimes this is so 
ingrained in them and they don’t realize that what they’re doing 
is further damaging to their partner, or ex-partner if it’s the case 
of a separation. 
 
And we also know that our court system, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
overburdened by a lot of the cases that they deal with, and we 
want to keep our courts available for dealing with very serious 
situations that are happening and getting them done in a timely 
fashion so people are not waiting. We know we have 
overcrowding in our jails, and we have a lot of issues with 
regards to that as well. So if could expedite the cases that don’t 
necessarily need to go into the court system, that would be more 
beneficial. 
 
And so I think, for example, the family law aspect, it would be 
nice to be able to have a system that we could use that can free 
up court workers and lawyers and such so that they could do the 
work that they need to do to solving some other criminal calls. 
 
So when the Minister of Justice presented this bill and the 
changes with regards to this bill, he also indicated that this bill 
will also amend other Acts. So it amends The Children’s Law 
Act, 1997, The Family Maintenance Act, 1997, The Family 

Property Act, and The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998. So all of these 
Acts will need to be updated as well because of the changes of 
the language that is going to be used within this Act. And my 
understanding that a lot of the changes are with regards to 
putting in the language of family mediators in here. And so 
again this is to promote early dispute resolution. 
 
[15:45] 
 
So we know that when we have early dispute resolution 
methods in family law, it’s cost effective because the quicker 
this can get done, then the less families need to spend on the 
costs. We get fast results, and there’s a lot less emotional 
turmoil with both parties, and children involved too because 
they know that their parents are still trying to manage the 
logistics of the separation, and that causes a lot of stress on the 
whole family. So if we could do this in an out-of-court aspect 
and have early dispute resolution, that is more appropriate in 
resolving these family disputes. 
 
So the other new provision that is being proposed here, Mr. 
Speaker, is with regards to making sure that the application to 
the court is done in a quick manner because they do adjust the 
issues of when there’s a relationship that has a history of 
violence or a child has been abducted or a restraining order is in 
place, the family can receive an exception and have this 
completed a lot more quickly. 
 
So again that brings me back to what I was saying before, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, about the fact that with our high rates of 
domestic violence — and that’s what’s actually been, you 
know, documented — we know that there’s a lot of 
relationships, that there’s domestic violence within those 
relationships that aren’t necessarily being documented. So we 
want to ensure that if there is a history of violence, if there’s 
any threat to the children, that people could end these 
relationships quickly so that they could progress and the 
families can move on. 
 
Some of the questions I had though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when 
I was reviewing this, and I know my colleague will review that 
a lot more when she has a chance in committee, was the access 
to family mediators within the province. And I know they need 
to have special training, which is very important. And I think 
we’ve got to be mindful of the importance of that training so 
that they could do the jobs that they need to do effectively. 
 
But if we have specially trained family mediators, how many do 
we have in the province? Are they very available? We know 
this is very valuable. We know it’s cost effective to go through 
family mediation. What is the government doing to ensure that 
there’s a process in place to have them available? 
 
And what’s the cost of family mediators? Who sets the cost, 
and who’s paying for that? I have to admit that I don’t know a 
lot of those details. If the family’s having to pay those costs, 
what does that look like? Because we have a lot of families that 
don’t have the financial means, and if they don’t have the 
financial means, is there a process for them to receive this 
service also? 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when reviewing this bill, a lot of the 
changes, I have to say that they seem to make sense. We need to 



3388 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

review these Acts and make sure that they’re applicable to the 
issues that we have in our community. And I’m happy to see 
that some of the changes here do address just that. But also, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we have to ensure that we go through this with 
a critical lens, you know, and ensure that all of the avenues 
were looked at because we don’t know when we’ll get back to 
reviewing this Act again, and we want to make sure that when 
we put forward something that it’s going to be in the best 
interests of the residents of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I know our critic that’s on our side will ensure that she 
does an excellent job in committee with regards to this bill. And 
with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to allow my 
colleagues to have more discussion with regards to the bill, and 
I’m going to move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 98. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 
Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 98. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 99 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 99 — The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2)/Loi modificative 
n°2 de 2017 sur l’interprétation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 
to enter into the debate today on Bill No. 99, The Interpretation 
Amendment Act, 2017. And it was just, it was just about a year 
and a half ago, I guess now, Mr. Speaker, that the original bill 
— the bill that we’re amending here, Mr. Speaker, Bill 40 — 
came before this legislature that created the opportunity for the 
Sask Party government to privatize our Crowns up to 49 per 
cent without having to take it to the public, contrary to the 
Crown protection Act. 
 
So they’d created an opportunity to privatize without taking it 
to the people, in direct conflict actually with . . . On three 
different, separate occasions; in three elections, the Premier had 
very much committed and the Sask Party had very much 
committed to not privatizing our Crowns. They had said that 
those Crowns were important to the people of Saskatchewan. 
They had learned their lesson in 2003 and realized that Crowns 
were important to the people of Saskatchewan because they 
create good, mortgage-paying jobs, because they keep services 
like telecom rates lower. They make sure that people in rural 
communities have access to services where a private company 
might not provide those services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and even recognizing that despite the fact our 
Crowns have contributed greatly to our General Revenue Fund 
— the government, this government and governments before 
actually draw dividends from our Crown corporations that help 
us pay for things like health care and highways and education 
— the government had agreed that people in Saskatchewan like 

our Crowns, so it was unusual that they introduced this bill. 
Actually maybe it wasn’t that unusual because we had seen 
privatization by stealth, and actually not just by stealth — 
directly. We can take a look at ISC [Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan], Mr. Speaker, and the 
privatization of the Information Services Corporation. We can 
look at other examples: our liquor stores. There’s all kinds of 
things, Mr. Speaker, that have gone on anyway. 
 
This particular bill, Bill No. 99, what happened last fall 
actually, Mr. Speaker, is the Premier says that he heard from the 
people of Saskatchewan. He heard loudly and clearly yet again 
that they didn’t want the Sask Party government to sell off our 
Crowns, Mr. Speaker. And so the Premier, in a Facebook Live 
post, says that he understood that that is the case, that they will 
repeal Bill 40 which allowed for the privatization of our 
Crowns up to 49 per cent. 
 
But two days later, Mr. Speaker . . . It’s the same thing with this 
government. They say one thing, but then you get the whole 
picture a short while later, Mr. Speaker, where the Premier said, 
oh no, no, no, we’re not repealing all of Bill 40. We’re not 
going to take back the piece around winding up and dissolution 
of a Crown corporation because there were a few parts to The 
Interpretation Act, Mr. Speaker, that Bill 40 — and actually it 
was in May of last year, May 3rd actually — that the Premier 
admitted they needed Bill 40 to do what they did to STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company]. So I was just briefly 
talking about Crowns and what this government has done with 
Crowns. 
 
The Saskatchewan Transportation Company, with no 
preparation, with no preparation . . . As the Health critic, it was 
interesting to me that this government could make such a huge 
budget choice, such a huge choice that impacts people from all 
across the province to cut, to get rid of the transportation 
company that really binds our geographically disperse province 
together. 
 
And I say they did it without any preparation because, as the 
Health critic, I saw an email two days after, just within a couple 
days after this government just made this budget decision that 
the deputy minister, or the assistant deputy minister actually 
was emailing folks saying, hey, what’s the impact on Health 
with this STC cut? And there was a huge impact in not only the 
transportation of blood products and medical samples, but 
getting people to medical appointments, getting people to their 
cancer appointments — all kinds of things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this is a government who often doesn’t think before they act. 
But in this case, with Bill No. 40 which was the precursor to 
Bill No. 99, this is a government who said they saw the error of 
their ways but still couldn’t just take it back to where the people 
of Saskatchewan want. Instead of repealing the whole bill, they 
are still insistent that the definition of privatize does not include 
a winding up and dissolution of a Crown corporation.  
 
I don’t think that that’s what the people of Saskatchewan were 
talking about when they said to the Premier and said to Sask 
Party MLAs on the other side of the House that we don’t want 
our Crowns privatized. I think that people in Saskatchewan 
were saying we don’t want you to call it a windup and then start 
selling it off piecemeal either, Mr. Speaker. I’m pretty sure that 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3389 

that’s not what the people that I’ve spoken to about Crown 
corporations were talking about as well. 
 
STC has been a huge cut. It amazed me this summer and this 
fall in my constituency. I wasn’t quite sure how much I’d hear 
about the STC cut, but knocking on doors in the more affluent 
parts of my constituency, I actually heard from people who 
have relatives all across this province who relied on STC to get 
family to Saskatoon or to get back out to their respective 
communities — students who are in town either at the 
polytechnic or at the university, cutting off their lifeline. 
 
I actually just talked to someone just a few weeks ago, two 
people — an electrician and an editor actually, a writer — who 
have now moved to Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, in large measure 
because of the cut to STC. They were a one-car family. They 
were a couple, a 2018 couple living in two different cities 
because of economic reasons. One had a job here. One had a job 
in Saskatoon, and STC was their lifeline. They had one car and 
this couple . . . The wife commuted every week back to 
Saskatoon, and she found that unfortunately she had some 
concerns with the bus service that was now being offered, Mr. 
Speaker, and I know her husband had some concerns. There 
was great comfort in being on an STC bus, a large bus with a 
professional driver, and you know that you’re in good hands 
instead of having to meet in a parking lot, Mr. Speaker, and be 
dropped off at an approximate time. 
 
Bill No. 99 doesn’t go far enough. I’m glad the government 
heard from people in Saskatchewan that they don’t want their 
Crowns privatized, that Crowns serve well the people of 
Saskatchewan. And it’s really great when a Crown makes 
money and provides dividends to the people of Saskatchewan 
and supports things like health care. But there’s other reasons 
why we have Crown corporations and that’s public service. And 
Crowns allow us that opportunity in a province like 
Saskatchewan to make sure, for example, that we have 
transportation from all four corners of the province. We would 
encourage this government to rethink the decision to not include 
winding it up in dissolution. They should be actually repealing 
all of Bill 40, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we would like to see 
and I think that that’s what people in Saskatchewan would like 
to see. 
 
I know that that’s the message that I’ve gotten loud and clear 
from people on the doorstep and people who come into my 
office. And when I have an opportunity to talk to folks about 
other issues, they share that it’s . . . STC was a big part of all 
our lives, Mr. Speaker. And the Premier admitted back in the 
spring that Bill 40, the bill that we’re amending, was the reason, 
or allowed them to privatize or, pardon me, sell off STC. 
 
So again this is a government, you had a Premier who came on 
to Facebook Live, made an announcement — it sounded like a 
great announcement — and lots of people celebrated. And this 
government got the benefit of that celebration and then . . . 
Many people don’t realize that the government didn’t go the 
full way and are still holding on firm to the ability to do what 
they want with our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But with that, I know I’ve got colleagues who will enter into the 
debate on Bill No. 99, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017, 
and I know that they’ll have lots of good comments to make. 

And I know when it gets to committee there’ll be lots of 
questions as well. But with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 99, The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[16:00] 
 

Bill No. 103 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 103 — The Land 
Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m happy 
to stand today to add my comments with regards to Bill No. 
103, the land contracts Act, amendments to that Act. My 
understanding, when the Minister of Justice brought forward 
this Act, that a lot of the intentions of the amendments is to 
modernize the Act and also build with regards to the 
recommendations that were reported from . . . recommendations 
contained in the 2014 Law Reform Commission of 
Saskatchewan report, which was titled the Reform of The Land 
Contracts (Actions) Act. And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with 
regards to the recommendations brought forward and the fact 
that this Act needed a little bit of touching up and modernizing, 
that’s why this is being brought forward now. 
 
But also my understanding is because of the changes that’ll be 
made with this Act, it will result in repealing The Home 
Owners’ Protection Act and The Agreements of Sale 
Cancellation Act as well. And so he’ll have some changes with 
regards to a lot of the legislation that we have. And I think 
again it’s always really important to bring forward legislation 
that needs to be looked at and modernized with regards to the 
day and age that we have today. 
 
So with regards to the remarks that the Minister of Justice 
provided, he indicated that this bill will provide some protection 
to borrowers with regards to require lenders to obtain leave of 
the court before starting foreclosure proceedings. So this 
basically means that this will provide some time to get the 
mortgage up to date if the individual needs a little bit more time 
and some adjustments with regards to that or allow the ability to 
refinance or sell the property before foreclosure and judicial 
sale and/or time to find alternative accommodation. 
 
And so this would be happening in the case of an individual or 
family that’s having some financial difficulties and unable to 
maybe keep up with the payments that they originally 
established. And I think, if in all cases, if we can help 
individuals in these situations so that they don’t have to 
undergo, like, foreclosure, bankruptcy, I think that is really 



3390 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

important that we help families with regards to that because 
those issues will have long-standing consequences on 
individual’s borrowing abilities. And we know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that something that might happen today, you know, in 
a few years later you might be in a different situation. And to 
have a situation, a bad time happen, at that point that will 
impact you for many years down the road is really unfortunate. 
 
And with regards to this Act, it was brought forward actually in 
1943. It’s about 70 years old. And so it got me thinking, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, if this maybe was not put forward because of 
the situation that people were in with regards to the dirty 
thirties. And I think we were all really familiar with stories that 
we’ve heard, either from our grandparents, great-grandparents, 
about the struggles that they had back in the dirty thirties, and 
how just due to the fact that it was hard to make a living at that 
point, and families were really struggling. It probably put them 
in really tough situations, and they had to leave their homes, 
and they had to just leave everything. 
 
And I know we’re definitely not in that dire need of time, but I 
sit and think about the high unemployment rates we have at this 
time, and a lot of individuals who are really struggling. And I 
know my office, and I’m sure many others in this House here, 
they’re getting calls from constituents who are having a tough 
time making ends meet. We know with high unemployment and 
the fact that costs have gone up with regards to things like 
power or property taxes, because municipalities are struggling 
with the cuts that this government has made. 
 
And then the PST [provincial sales tax] has gone up, and also 
has caused a lot of businesses less business because people are 
spending less. And families can’t afford as much because 
they’re paying more. And the lack of PST exemption now with 
children’s clothing is higher. Everything, all the costs are 
higher. 
 
And I know, I was talking to some business owners around 
Christmastime, and they said that sales were a lot less around 
Christmastime than normal. But a lot of grocery stores said that 
usually when the economy is struggling, their sales are still 
quite stable because people need food, and especially even 
around holidays like Christmas, people will get their groceries 
and they’ll make sure that they have a good meal. But even they 
said that their sales were down during this last holiday season. 
 
And so that really shows an impact that people are struggling. 
And I know in Prince Albert we have some really wonderful 
volunteers who provide a Christmas meal. And they had well 
over 2,000 people attending that on Christmas Day — 2,000 
people who didn’t have a meal at home to have with their 
family, that they came together with the rest of the community 
and shared a meal. And that’s wonderful that that community 
group did that, but it really does show that people are 
struggling. 
 
And so in a time like this when we know a lot of people are 
struggling within our province, we have a duty to ensure that 
we can help them get through this time. And instead of trying to 
take 3.5 per cent of their income back to support the 
government’s bad decisions, maybe we should allow them to 
keep that money and so that they could afford their costs of 
living a bit more. So the amendments to this bill . . . It hopes to 

reduce the costs involved in the process with regards to 
ensuring that people have an ability to be able to pay their bills 
and be able to keep their homes, hopefully, so that there isn’t 
foreclosure or have other means to manage what they owe. 
 
But there’s also responsibility for . . . [inaudible] . . . I can’t say 
that word right now . . . and lenders to go through the due 
process and ensure they go through a process so that they’re not 
just foreclosing on a bunch of homes. But one thing that’s really 
important to keep in mind is that this is not intended for farm 
land and commercial properties. So this would be just strictly 
for, my understanding, is for homeowners and so there’s a 
whole other area that needs to be looked at and regarded to. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know a lot of my colleagues will 
have some more information that they’ll want to put forward 
with regards to this bill. And I definitely know that the critic 
responsible for this bill will have a lot of questions that she’ll 
want to ask in committee and discussion and dialogue with 
regards to the minister. And I think it’s really important that we 
ensure that everything is accepted with regards to the changes 
of this bill. So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to 
adjourn debate of Bill 103. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 
Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 103. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 104 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 104 — The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017/Code des droits de 
la personne de la Saskatchewan de 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is my honour today to rise 
and turn to debate on Bill No. 104, the Saskatchewan human 
rights code amendment Act, 2017. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think 
any time when we are discussing the issue of human rights, it’s 
probably appropriate that we stand up and pay some attention. 
This is one of the most fundamental and important rights of any 
society, of certainly any province, and it is an area where this 
province has a proud history. 
 
I’m not sure that all members are aware of this, and I’ll say it 
perhaps for my own benefit and those at home, but 
Saskatchewan was the first jurisdiction to bring in a Bill of 
Rights, way back in 1947, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We were in the 
foreground. We were at the absolute cutting edge of human 
rights at that time. In fact, other countries have modelled their 
human rights bills and codes on the 1947 Bill of Rights that was 
enacted right here in this Assembly in 1947. And I think that’s 
something that we all should be very proud of. My colleague 
here tells me that was passed by . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Tommy Douglas and Frank Scott. I think we should give them 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3391 

credit there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And when we are at our best, 
we are groundbreakers in this province, and we have been 
historically at the cutting edge of human rights. And I hope that 
we continue to do so. 
 
So when I first saw this bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was quite 
excited that perhaps we were doing something innovative again. 
But what this bill proposes is important, but not exactly cutting 
edge. It is basically complying with legislation and that is 
bringing the Human Rights Code, making it bilingual. So it 
doubles, of course, the size of the Act by adding both French 
and English portions, which is certainly important, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and it is something that should be done. 
 
But I think perhaps maybe it might be a bit of a missed 
opportunity as well here. I know that human rights complaints 
in this province have not decreased over the last number of 
years. In fact last year there were 144 complaints brought to the 
Human Rights Commission in Saskatchewan, a number that, 
perhaps on one hand, is a signal to people’s willingness to come 
forward and is a signal to public awareness, which I think is 
probably part of the equation, and that’s to be commended in 
part by the good work of the commission and those who work 
there. 
 
But it also does I think signal and point to some issues that we 
still grapple with — and certainly Saskatchewan isn’t alone 
there — and that is having basic human rights respected. We 
know that some of the most challenging issues, or the issues 
that are in the news and on the minds of people, are impacted 
by human rights and how we address and protect the human 
rights of the citizens of Saskatchewan. I think of the notion of 
reconciliation and what role that human rights and the respect 
of human rights has to play in that exercise, an exercise that this 
whole country really needs to undertake, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I think of some of the gains that we’ve made with regard to 
LGBTQ [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and/or 
questioning] rights in both this province, in this country, and 
around the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think that success 
is not in small part to the respecting of human rights both by 
individuals but sometimes led by lawmakers in this country, 
and again something that we’ve been I think ahead of the curve 
at least in this country with regard to issues such as gay 
marriage. Perhaps not the trail-breakers that the Douglas 
government was back in 1947, but ahead of the curve there. 
 
So I think that there are some opportunities when we’re looking 
at the Human Rights Code that we might have concerned 
ourself with when bringing this legislation forward. Of course it 
opens up to the debate in this Assembly and the scrutiny of the 
ministry and the minister. So any time we’re opening up that 
legislation it provides an opportunity to not only hold the status 
quo, but perhaps improve on it and hold our place as being in 
the foreground of human rights in the country. 
 
[16:15] 
 
There are a number, as I noted, a record number of human 
rights complaints that have been coming forward, 144, also a 
record number of complaints that have been dismissed. And I 
don’t have enough evidence to hazard a guess as to why that is 
the case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I think it’s something that 

warrants further investigation. And of course, as I’ve 
mentioned, there are troubling trends in our province and across 
the country that I think it would bear, would be worth our while 
to work with the Human Rights Commissioner to ensure that 
we are getting that right, that we are protecting the rights of the 
citizens of this province and that we take both human rights as a 
concept but the Human Rights Code, the Act, we take that very 
seriously, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I can’t help but thinking 
when we’re talking about this is that . . . Not of this bill perhaps 
but another bill that we have before us right now in this 
Assembly, Bill No. 89, that proposes to set aside certain 
portions of the Human Rights Code. And I’m not sure we’ve 
had a proper discussion about why we ought to do that. 
 
I think, I hope that we do enter into that debate and we have a 
fulsome discussion not only in this Assembly but with the 
people of Saskatchewan. Because any time I think that we talk 
about setting aside Charter rights, we start talking about setting 
aside provision in the Human Rights Code, I think it should get 
everyone’s attention. And I hope that it will and I hope that that 
discussion is full, that we consider it very carefully, Mr. 
Speaker, before we enter into that. 
 
The other thing that I think some people will know, that the 
notwithstanding clause, which we don’t hear about very often 
because it simply, in the history of this country, hasn’t been 
invoked very often, is that there is a five-year sunset clause that 
comes along with the notwithstanding clause for the Charter of 
Rights and Freedoms. And that was put in as a safeguard to 
ensure that it would have to come back every five years. There 
is no such provision when we are making notwithstanding 
portions of the Human Rights Code. 
 
So when we propose to set aside the Human Rights Code by an 
Act of this Assembly, we actually are doing that in perpetuity 
until we come back to this Assembly at some point — but we’re 
not compelled to — to revisit that. So I think that that is 
something that ought to be paid very, very close attention to, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. I mean I think what I’d like to do is read a 
couple of pieces from the Human Rights Commission annual 
report that I believe the current Education minister signed off 
on about the importance of the Human Rights Commission and 
the human rights Act. 
 
The commission meets the obligations of public education. 
Students, and I think we should listen to the voice of students, 
at an event noted that they don’t want nice words, they want 
action. They were concerned about racism. And it goes on to 
say in the closing paragraph: “If protecting rights was easy we 
would not need a Charter.” And Mr. Arnot goes on to say: 
 

To that I would add, if protecting rights was easy, we 
would not need a Charter or a human rights code. This 
work, difficult though it may be, is fundamentally 
important. The Commission remains committed to this 
important work and to serving the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Of course I don’t think I have to explain to anyone here the 
importance of human rights. I think that that is something that I 
trust that we all uphold and find important. And with that, I 
would also hope that I would have consensus amongst members 
in this Assembly that the suspension of any portion of our 
Human Rights Code should be met with a great deal of scrutiny. 



3392 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

And so I would put that challenge, and that thought hopefully, 
to all members here, encourage them to think carefully. Not 
precluding any decision regarding that but we need to have that 
discussion clearly, thoughtfully, and out in the open because it 
is a very serious measure to consider. 
 
I wanted to go back to, again, Commissioner Arnot. He said, 
reflecting on the human rights motto, from many people . . . the 
Saskatchewan motto rather, “from many peoples, strength:” 
 

. . . observing that this motto recognizes that many people 
have come from all over the world to this province with 
many different skills and talents. 
 
This province is strong, in part, because it recognizes that 
by virtue of being born, all people [all people] 
automatically have human rights. 
 
But the “concept” of rights if it is only written on paper, 
has no support if the people do not stand together. 

 
Citizenship is about knowledge of rights, respect for rights, and 
responsible action. So I would counsel, if I may from this place, 
all of us to ensure that we take responsible action with regard to 
the contemplation of notwithstanding certain portions of the 
Human Rights Code. In case folks at home are wondering, the 
particular sections that are being contemplated to be, in Bill 89, 
to be made notwithstanding, the first one is the freedom of 
conscience. So this is what we’re anticipating. Every person and 
every class of persons has the right to freedom of conscience, 
opinion, and belief, and freedom of religious association, 
teaching, practice, and worship. So I’ll leave that there. 
 
Also, section 12, discrimination and accommodation, service, or 
facility prohibited. 
 

No person, directly or indirectly, alone or with another, or 
by the [imposition] . . . of another shall, on the basis of a 
prohibited ground: 
 

deny to any person or class of persons the 
accommodation, services or facilities to which the public 
is customarily admitted or that are offered to the public; 
or 
 
discriminate against any person or class of persons with 
respect to any accommodation, services or facilities to 
which the public is customarily admitted or that are 
offered to the public. 

 
The other, the section 13 that is noted again in Bill 89, is the 
right to education. So just so we’re clear, what’s being 
contemplated there impacts those sections of The Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Code. And I think that that is something that we 
ought to be very, very cautious again and have strong and 
fruitful conversations before we contemplate setting those 
sections aside. 
 
And we also should do so with the full understanding that there 
is no sunset clause. Like as I have mentioned previously, as 
people may or may not know — I think many do — it’s not the 
same as notwithstanding the Charter of Rights and Freedoms 
with that five-year sunset clause. It is notwithstanding those 

sections in perpetuity until pending, awaiting Act of this 
Legislative Assembly. So that is quite a large deal. 
 
Some places that we might look elsewhere, you know, to 
expand on our notion, again regain that place as a jurisdiction at 
the forefront of human rights would be, you know, around new 
Canadians and protecting the rights of new Canadians. I’ll just 
read from a report here on human rights in Saskatchewan, 
emerging issues: 
 

Of the Western provinces, Saskatchewan has seen the 
largest jump in immigrant-related complaints, from a 
consistent 13% of complaints before 2008 to almost 30% 
in 2008-2009. This number stayed up at approximately 
24% until 2011-12 when it dropped back down to 11 . . . 
 
The Human Rights . . . commented on this jump in 
complaints . . . [saying] “Complaints from new Canadians 
accounted for one third of complaints filed this year. The 
Commission has identified racism in employment as a 
growing area of concern for complaint processing and as a 
topic on which to focus public awareness.” 

 
And of course, as is often the case with legislation but certainly 
in an area such as human rights, these issues are emerging. As 
circumstances change in this province, the need to respond at 
the very least, at the very least responding to those changes in 
the makeup and the dynamics of society within this province. 
So I think that that is very important. 
 
There are millions, probably billions of people around this 
world who would give almost anything to be governed by a 
piece of legislation such as this, to enjoy those human rights 
that we take for granted here in this province and that we were 
amongst the first to enjoy in this province way back in 1947. 
 
I think we should never become complacent about that, that we 
should always strive to innovate, to, as I’ve said, retain that role 
as innovators, as protectors of human rights, to be the place 
where people look to for innovative and forward-thinking 
legislation. You know, the protection of human rights, we are 
the first province in Canada to have a human rights . . . a bill of 
rights, and I think that that is something that we ought to be 
very proud of. 
 
The problem sometimes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that when it’s 
been in place for a long time, we forget. We become 
complacent, and we too often don’t know our own history. So I 
do want to make sure — and I think I’ve gotten it on the record 
a few times now — to champion that, to highlight that, because 
it really is, you know, to be known around the world as the 
place to come to to learn about how to protect human rights is 
something quite extraordinary. And I think we should shout that 
from the rooftops, as we should continuously look at legislation 
before us and make sure that we are doing the job that we could 
be doing. 
 
Certainly it is a good thing to update this legislation to ensure 
that it’s bilingual, and I commend that. But I think that there’s 
also a missed opportunity here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I hope 
it’s something that will be rectified if not by this government, 
then perhaps when we change places across the aisle. With that, 
I think I’m going to conclude my remarks, and I will move to 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3393 

adjourn debate on Bill No. 104. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 104, The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 105 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 105 — The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So often when 
people find out that you’re elected to the Assembly, they want 
to know what it’s like, what the job’s like. How did you get 
here? What’s the day-to-day like? And borrowing from my 
colleague from Regina Elphinstone-Centre, there is nothing 
quite like standing up to speak for a little bit on a consequential 
amendments Act. 
 
The bill itself was something I had a bit of a song in my heart 
for. Of course the consequential amendment Act maybe is . . . 
I’ll have to admit to having a little less passion for. But 
nonetheless this is important that we enter this into second 
reading here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I think . . . I like to start, when I’m speaking to second 
reading of bills, I’m always curious about the reasons that this 
particular bill comes forward. So I often, I go to the comments 
by the minister, in this case the Attorney General, when putting 
legislation forward. He said this way back on November 22nd 
of 2017: 
 

I rise today to move second reading of The Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 2017. This 
Act accompanies The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 
2017 and makes consequential amendments to the 
Saskatchewan employment code. The Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Code is being repealed and replaced with a 
new bilingual statute, and references to the name of the old 
Act in the Saskatchewan employment code will be updated 
to reference the new Act. There is no change in substance 
to the Saskatchewan employment code. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 2017. 

 
[16:30] 
 
I won’t always leave the last word to the Attorney General, but 
I think in this case I think he’s covered most of what is 
contained in this bill and I think I have very little extra of value 
to add. So with that, I’m going to conclude my remarks and 
move adjournment of Bill No. 105. 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 105. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 106 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 106 — The 
Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — I thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 
on adjourned debate on Bill 106. Initially looking at it . . . Of 
course I know we’ll have more questions in the committee, but 
going into the details of it . . . And there’s a provision . . . In this 
bill there’s some housekeeping points that they’re taking care 
of, which is fine. We know that from time to time we’ll have 
amendments and legislation that corrects some of the . . . And 
they’re minor things that they find in a bill and they make the 
amendments, and that’s fine. 
 
But in this bill they’ve also added . . . Not only have they done 
some housekeeping in it, the bill also adds a whole new section. 
And that whole new section gives the, I guess, the process of 
trying to find records and the whereabouts of somebody through 
certain records or information, maybe a landlord. And my 
understanding, if it was a missing person, like if we have a child 
missing and you have an Amber Alert, the police maybe before 
would have to go to the courts, or there was a provision for 
them to get information of who the landlord was, certain 
records and documents that would help them maybe move 
quickly to find a missing child or a missing person. And it’s 
now giving the powers . . . Whether they had to go through the 
court and ask a judge for, you know, a court order or for 
whatever, a warrant to get the information. 
 
Being of course, as I’ve said earlier, commenting I’m no lawyer 
as my colleagues and the critic is. I know in committee we’ll 
get to go through some of these details and probably know, you 
know, some of the process that are needed in here, or we’ll 
definitely find out. 
 
But I’m curious at the end of the day if this . . . what the 
purpose of bringing this bill forward and this new Act. Has 
there been some type of identification? Or have they, you know, 
come across a situation where maybe someone was put in 
harm’s way because they didn’t get to act quick enough, a 
police officer? 
 
Now this gives chiefs of police, a commanding officer, certain 
powers. And any time you give . . . And we’ve said that before 
here. I give an example. We have legislation that protects 
certain things, ministries, and a certain way business is done, of 
all of us in here. And it’s the law of the land and you have to do 
that. But sometimes when you take legislation and you give the 
power to a minister, that that minister has the powers to do 



3394 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

whatever they want and changing the regulations rules. And 
we’ve seen the Sask Party government has done that quite a bit 
over the time that I’ve been here, where they’ve taken the 
power away, I think, from the legislation and from this 
legislature and actually have given the powers . . . or the 
ministry, and they’ve given it to the minister to just . . . Stroke 
of a pen, they can change it and do whatever they want. And 
we’ve seen, we’ve raised it many times about the concerns 
about doing that. 
 
In this situation it brings up different, I think, raises different 
questions. There might be a reason why they need to move 
quickly on this, as I said — an Amber Alert, you know, a 
missing person being put in harm’s way. But in that situation 
I’m hoping . . . And I know my colleagues will ask the 
questions that need to be asked, the critic in committee, and try 
to find out the details. What happens should somebody use 
those powers and not use those powers in the right way? Is 
there a chance of that happening? What kind of guarantees are 
they putting in there to protect citizens’ rights, being that it 
would be used in a way . . . And I’m not implying that it would 
be, but you never know. Something happens where someone 
feels like that. 
 
Will they take that provision . . . Can they go to the court? Is 
there an appeal process? How will that happen? Is it going to 
the Supreme Court? And I realize sometimes legislation comes 
in here, and again there might be a good reason why this 
amendment’s coming in or this new, you know, this new 
section will give those powers. But any time you, I think you go 
on someone’s rights . . . And my colleague talked earlier about, 
you know, certain rights that are certain protections that we’re 
proud of in this province that protect people. You don’t want to 
be going and doing anything that causes us or anyone harm 
when you’re trying to do the right thing, and I mean passing 
this. 
 
And this might be good legislation. It might have been talked 
about. And it might be the right legislation that we . . . 
[inaudible] . . . and section in there. But again I go back to this; 
there’s going to have to be some questions. And maybe it’s 
come from Justice or it’s come from legal counsel. It’s come 
from concerned citizens, or it comes from situations where 
again, someone has been put in harm’s way and they’re going 
to come up with this legislation to find somebody. We don’t 
want to see anybody in harm’s way. 
 
But any time you give certain powers to an individual, I’m 
hoping . . . And I guess my colleagues and the critic will have 
some tough questions in committee to make sure and, you 
know, she’ll probably consult with some of her colleagues. And 
we’ll see where this goes and what this provision brings. Again, 
we’re always on the side of the police to be able to find 
someone. Should one of our grandkids or, you know, an adult 
family member, or friend, community member go missing, we 
want the police to be able to do their job. But we want to make 
sure people’s rights . . . 
 
And I know that’s why we have the opportunity here to debate 
these bills and find out, what’s the purpose? And I know 
committee gives us . . . This is one venue that we get to do this, 
an opportunity to have a dialogue and ask some questions and 
put something on the record. But at the end of the day, I guess 

in committee is where we can get to, to the actually . . . the 
questions that need to be asked and hopefully get the answers. 
 
We talk about government and the House, that we want to be 
able to work in a way where we work together in a positive 
way. I hear that. And sometimes . . . I mean from the public 
looking at it, you wouldn’t think that’s happening. And 
sometimes I think it’s a free-for-all in here unless the Deputy 
Speaker decides to tone it down and, you know, be the referee, 
and he does a good job of that. 
 
So having said this, I know that at the end of the day there’s 
going to be some questions that we will have in committee. My 
colleagues are going to have questions that they want to . . . 
And there’s going to be many of my colleagues, you know, if 
I’m missing things that are in here. And that’s why it’s nice to 
have my colleagues and myself and go into a committee where 
you have an opportunity to question the minister and his 
officials. And sometimes those officials will have the answers 
that we are looking for or the reason why we’re putting in new 
sections or we’re amending it. They have those answers and 
obviously they have, you know, the staff and the information 
that’s needed. 
 
And I’m hoping at the end of the day they have consulted. We 
have said that. Here we have a government . . . And we’ve said 
this very clearly from many, many different places I’ve heard; 
the government doesn’t consult enough and needs to do that. 
This government has been very bad, when I say . . . for not 
consulting with many Saskatchewan residents before they just 
go out and do what they want to do. There is no . . . 
 
So on that note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would encourage them 
to make sure they consult more; they do what they need to do 
with the leaders, our local leaders, our elected leaders. But they 
can also consult with the opposition. We can work together 
sometimes on certain issues. So with saying that, this is a 
process, like I said. We’re going to go to committee. We’ll ask 
some tough questions, and hopefully they’ll have the 
information that we’re needing and making sure that no one . . . 
and making sure that those provisions in the new Act in here or 
the new section in here will give the law enforcement the 
opportunities to ensure, whether it’s a child missing on an 
Amber Alert, that they get the information they need to make 
sure. If it’s a landlord who is residing at that residence, they can 
find out. I understand that. Or if it’s a missing adult or a person 
. . . they can find out. 
 
So having said that, I think again my colleagues have a few 
more things they’ll want to say on this. So at this point I’m 
prepared to adjourn debate on Bill 106. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill 106. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 101 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3395 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 101 — The 
Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m proud 
to stand in my place today to add some discussion to Bill No. 
101, The Agricultural Implements Amendment Act. This was 
brought forward by the Minister of Agriculture in the fall 
session and so I’m happy to be able to add some of my remarks. 
 
This Act regulates the sale, lease, and lease purchase of new 
and used agricultural implements. So it has a lot of information 
within this Act, and it’s a really important Act, the more that 
I’ve been reading about it, about some of the laws and 
regulations that it applies to. 
 
So the Agricultural Implements Board is appointed through this 
Act, and the regulations on how that board is appointed. That 
board investigates and adjudicates complaints regarding 
warranties, repairs, and parts and services of agricultural 
equipment. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I realize that . . . I 
believe you come from an agricultural constituency, and I was 
raised in a farm town. And so we know that, when it’s seeding 
and harvest time, it becomes a really busy and hectic time, and 
so ensuring that things are regulated properly is really 
important. 
 
Changes from . . . This bill was last revised 14 years ago and we 
know there’s been lots of changes within farming practices and 
the technology for farms now. It just amazes me when I look at 
the farm equipment that they have and how far advanced we’ve 
become since my days of hanging out on the farm and such, and 
it’s pretty impressive when you see the equipment that they 
have, and the technology. 
 
And also we know that equipment comes with a hefty cost, and 
all of that stuff is very pricey. And when you’re in the midst of 
seeding or harvesting, you have very little time when something 
happens to one of the equipment to get it fixed, and that 
becomes first priority. And I know a lot of the parts and 
businesses that help with maintaining that. I’ve known 
mechanics that are called out at all times of the day. They know 
at that time that they need to be on call at any time to get out 
there and fix things. And also the businesses, they make 
changes to their schedules so that they’re open longer hours and 
oftentimes seven days a week now during those periods of time. 
Because you want to make sure you get your harvest off before 
the frost comes, or you want to make sure you get your seeding 
in right away so that you could have a good harvest in the end. 
 
So the board asked for the legislation to be reviewed, especially 
with regards to increasing the levels of compensation. And also 
agricultural implement manufacturers and dealers have asked 
for this legislation to be reviewed as well, and to consider the 
value of the legislation and make it a little bit more comparable 
to now and the changes that have happened within the 14 years. 
 
So the compensation levels are going to increase and the 
penalties on distributors who fail to maintain an adequate 
supply of repair parts is going to also increase. We know that 

there’s an expectation that distributors ensure that repair parts 
come in within 72 hours. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know for 
a fact, and even myself riding the STC, farm parts were always 
distributed on STC. And that was a way that they made sure 
that this equipment got to where it needed to be. And we don’t 
have distributors in all farm locations, like, and so getting to the 
city and making sure you get the parts or like . . . How is that 
going to be maintained now? It’s going to be a lot trickier on 
ensuring that that 72 hours is maintained. 
 
And so I think we’ve got to be mindful of that. And I know that 
the critic will probably be asking a lot of questions with regards 
to that and how . . . We don’t want to be implementing penalties 
and increasing those penalties when we have a government here 
that created a system that’s going to make it even more difficult 
for those parts to get to where they need to be. So I think that 
needs to be evaluated, and we’ll definitely be talking to the 
stakeholders that this will involve. 
 
[16:45] 
 
So when you look at the compensation rates, they go up quite a 
substantial amount, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So the maximum 
award for compensation for a farmer under section 10 increases 
from 10,000 to 50,000. Like, that’s a $40,000 difference. And 
the maximum penalty for distributors who fail to pay an amount 
to the board required by section 12 is increased from 5,000 to 
25,000. That’s five times as much. 
 
Penalties for distributors under section 24 increase from $5 a 
day to not more than $25,000, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
penalties under section 25 for the supply of repairs by 
distributors increase from 5,000 to 50,000. That’s 10 times as 
much. 
 
I don’t know if those costs have increased that much within the 
14 years. I find that to be quite a substantial leap. And so again 
I guess it’ll be a lot of consultation with stakeholders and seeing 
how they feel about this, because when I look at those numbers, 
that seems pretty substantial within changes, you know? And so 
we want to make some changes. We want it to be applicable but 
we also, we’ve got to recognize that they have to be reasonable 
as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And so also another change that’s going to be made with 
regards to the amendments to this Act is, the Agricultural 
Implements Compensation Fund is going to be eliminated and 
that money is going to go into the General Revenue Fund, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So any of the transactions will go right 
through the General Revenue Fund. And we see this 
government has been doing a lot of that, putting everything 
through the General Revenue Fund. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
when I see that I ask myself, how does that account for . . . How 
is it going to be accountable? How are we going to ensure that 
accountability is in place and that we know exactly where our 
dollars are going? 
 
I think taxpayers in this province deserve to know where their 
tax dollars are going and have a statement with regards to that. 
So with this compensation fund being eliminated, how is that 
going to happen? And how many dollars are we looking at with 
regards to that? 
 



3396 Saskatchewan Hansard March 13, 2018 

I know the critic will dig into that but, like, how much money 
are we talking about here? I would suspect it’s probably quite 
substantial. But is this just another way for this government to 
cover up their mismanagement, scandal, and waste? Right? Is 
this how they’re just trying to cover everything up and throw 
everything in the General Revenue Fund so that they can’t be 
accountable any longer? 
 
And so there’s a lot of questions with regards to the 
amendments to this bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We know there’s 
a lot of housekeeping and language changes, including 
gender-neutral language, which I think is really important. And 
probably in the agricultural business we probably did not do a 
good job with regards to making sure that language was gender 
neutral, so I think that’s a good step. And we know that there’s 
going to be changes that allow the minister to impose the 
penalties on dealers and distributors, where before that was 
administered by the board. So I don’t know why there was 
some changes there, and I think there’ll be some really good 
questions with regards to those changes. 
 
So for sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know the critic will be 
talking to stakeholders because that will be very important with 
regards to the changes of this bill, and they’ll be directing a lot 
of questions to the minister in committee. But I’m sure a lot of 
my other colleagues will have some further discussion they’ll 
want to add to the amendments to this bill, and so I’m going to 
move to adjourn my remarks with Bill No. 101. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 
Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 101, The 
Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 102 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 102 — The 
Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Here we are in the spring session of this portion of this 
legislature. And this is my first opportunity to get up and enter 
into debate once again and, as always, it is a real honour to be 
able to do so as part of the official opposition. 
 
This particular bill is making a few changes to The Agri-Food 
Act. Some of them are minor housekeeping changes such as 
defining, giving a new definition for business day, which means 
a day other than Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday. So that helps 
clarify in the Act some of the maybe interpretation issues that 
were had. 
 
Just to talk a little bit about what the Agri-Food Council is 
about and what this Act does, is it basically provides a structure 
for research and development and marketing and promotion of 

various forms of agricultural production here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Each one of these — there’s commissions, there’s boards, 
there’s marketing boards — they are all governed by the 
Agri-Food Council. This system has been in place for decades. 
Many of these boards have been in place, or commissions been 
in place, for many decades. And so it’s an orderly process, a 
way for many of these boards and commissions to access funds 
as well. All three of the types of agencies that are governed by 
this Act all have the ability to issue levies on their producers. So 
for the marketing boards and the development boards and the 
regular boards, they all have the opportunity to pass levies on 
their producers. 
 
Now of course as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, until 2012 or 
’13 when there was still a Wheat Board across Canada, wheat 
wasn’t included in any of these boards, nor was barley. But now 
they have established commissions to deal with these boards 
because they needed that. They needed some sort of regulatory 
oversight and agency so that levies and marketing and research 
and development could be worked at as a group, where 
individual farmers aren’t expected to look after all their own 
seed testing or the types of markets that they want to reach. 
 
So they represent a really important part of producers being 
able to work collectively. And certainly we know the strength 
of collectives when it comes to farmers being able to present 
themselves to the world. And obviously these . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . These collectives are important, despite what 
the member from Cannington might think, because they are 
important venues for farmers to use the levy dollars to enhance 
the entire industry, and not just leave farmers by themselves 
trying to figure out how they can improve their marketing 
practices, how they can improve the development and research 
of their particular farm, or of course whatever animals that they 
may be involved in. 
 
It’s interesting to see that there’s development boards and 
boards, and for example the pulse crops are represented by a 
board, but much of the other grains and plants are governed by 
development commissions. I was curious about that. I couldn’t 
find any reason why they’re different but, Mr. Speaker, it 
appears that these are probably historic . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’m having some difficulty hearing 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana. I see there are a lot of 
private conversations. I would ask the members either to cease 
and desist, or else take those behind the bar or out of the 
Chamber. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
There are a few changes that are being made in this bill. As the 
minister explained in his comments, it’s just to modernize and, 
as we see often, certain bills are brought up for modernization 
and language change that will just keep it relevant for today. 
 
One of the things that’s changing here is the ability of the 
boards to actually set their own terms and their number of 
members on the boards. And at this point in the current 
legislative scheme they have to go for an order in council. And 
as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, orders in council are lengthy 



March 13, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3397 

and cumbersome and procedural, and there’s a lot of red tape 
involved in them. So this is a positive move that’s being made 
at this point. The minister indicated he had consulted 
extensively with all the agencies and commissions and boards 
in order to make sure that this would suit their needs. And in 
speaking to some of the boards, I can say that this is something 
that’s being received well. 
 
Another part I think that is quite interesting is in section 21. The 
Agri-Food Council has a number of responsibilities to the 
minister. And there’s two new responsibilities that are being 
added, and one is to review minutes, board orders, and 
regulations. But the second one, which I find very interesting, is 
they’re now required to provide governance training to new 
agencies and work with established agencies to ensure that 
governance best practices are followed. 
 
Now I know, Mr. Speaker, having been on various boards in my 
time, that best practices in governance are something that’s 
really important for the proper functioning of these agencies. 
And quite often when you elect your own board members from 
your volunteer base, there will be gaps in awareness or 
exposure to proper board governance. And I think you can 
imagine what things can go wrong if board members aren’t 
properly trained or don’t understand the role of governance in 
their agency. So I think this is something that the Agri-Food 
Council is now going to be required to deal with. And I think 
it’s something that, you know, in many ways will strengthen the 
commissions and the boards that are being supervised by the 
Agri-Food Council. 
 
Another piece in terms of the general powers that is being 
added is that the Agri-Food Council now will be able to 
develop, deliver, or develop and deliver. So they can develop, 
they can deliver, or they can develop and deliver, which is kind 
of the whole smorgasbord of that concept, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And what can they develop and deliver? “. . . guidelines, 
principles and expectations for agency operations, governance 
and policy development.” And it goes on. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think this is obviously a response to maybe 
some struggles that some of the individual agencies are having 
in terms of governance and procedures and guidelines. And I 
think this is obviously a good move as well. 
 
There’s a limit now as well on . . . There’s something called the 
appeal committee and this is under the minister’s powers. An 
agency shall now no longer serve more than four terms. So 
that’s another change. I think that is welcomed because we 
don’t want to be like China, where you can just pass a law and 
be president for as long as you want to be. That would not be 
democratic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I suggest, and I think that is 
being reflected here in this bill because no one, no member of 
the council or commission can serve a term for more than four 
consecutive terms. I guess what they could do, though, is 
establish the terms to be 20 years long, but I don’t think that 
would be the intent of any of these committees. There is a 
requirement for the terms to be a minimum of three years. 
 
So this is giving some flexibility to these commissions and 
these boards to do what they need to do and operate their 
business, but it’s also requiring the Agri-Food Council to now 
make sure that these commissions and boards are given the 

tools that they need to serve their members. And the levy power 
is a very powerful part of what these commissions are able to 
do. They can raise a lot of money, and of course they are 
responsible for the development of that particular form of 
agriculture or agri-food. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think these are all good changes, 
although I know we’ll have more questions in committee. But at 
this point I am prepared to conclude my comments and adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 102, The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 102, The Agri-Food 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. It now being 5 o’clock this 
Assembly stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Apology 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3367 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3367 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3367 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3368 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3368 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 3368, 3369 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3368 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3368 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3368 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3369 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3376 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3369 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3369 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3369 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3369 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3370 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3370 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Women’s Day 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3370 
 Tim Hortons Brier Held in Regina 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3370 
 Rural Women’s Month Proclaimed 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3371 
 Women’s Final 8 Tournament a Success for Huskies and Cougars 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3371 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3371 
 Telemiracle 42 Raises Record-Breaking Amount 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3372 
 Remembering Kevin Phillips 
  Goudy ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3372 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Federal Carbon Pricing and Provincial Plan to Reduce Emissions 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3372 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3372 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3373 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3374 
 Carbon Capture and Storage 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3375 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3375 
 Public-Private Partnerships 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3375 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3375 
 Funding for Municipalities 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3376 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3376 
MESSAGE FROM HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3377 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on Question of Privilege 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3377 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Membership of the Board of Internal Economy 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3377 
 Vacancy in Regina Northeast Constituency 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3377 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 115 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3377 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3378 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 94 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3381 
 Bill No. 95 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3382 
 Bill No. 96 — The Choice of Court Agreements (Hague Convention Implementation) Act 
 Loi sur les accords d’élection de for (mise en œuvre de la Convention de La Haye) 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3384 
 Bill No. 97 — The Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3385 
 Bill No. 98 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi modificative diverse (résolution des conflits familiaux) de 2017 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3386 
 Bill No. 99 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2) 
 Loi modificative n°2 de 2017 sur l’interprétation 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3388 
 Bill No. 103 — The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3389 
 Bill No. 104 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017 
 Code des droits de la personne de la Saskatchewan de 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3390 
 Bill No. 105 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3393 
 Bill No. 106 — The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 2017 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3393 
 Bill No. 101 — The Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 2017 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3395 
 Bill No. 102 — The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3396 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


