


















































May 10, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 57A  THURSDAY, MAY 10, 2018, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4259 
 May 10, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, through you to 
all the members of this honourable Assembly, I would like to 
introduce a few guests from Sikh Society of Regina, and they’re 
sitting in your gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we call them Sikh Sangat. They are arranging 
another Kirtan, a Sikh parade. In Punjabi, we call it Nagar 
Kirtan. On this coming Saturday, it’s starting from the 
Gurudwara Sahib up to this Legislative Building. And they’re 
going to have free food right here on the east side of the 
building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these guests are as follows: Bikram Singh, known 
as Bill Singh, president of Sikh Society of Regina. We have 
Sohan Matharu, vice-president of Sikh Society of Regina. We 
have Gary Grewal, is a member, executive committee, Sikh 
Society of Regina. We have Inderjit Singh. We have Avtar 
Singh. We have Yadwinder Singh. He is my constituent as well, 
Mr. Speaker. We have Manmohan Singh Khuber. We have 
Dalvir Singh, Yadwinder Dhaliwal, my constituents, Mr. 
Speaker. We have Gagandeep Singh, and we have Amrinder 
Singh Sandhu. We also have Baldeep Singh Dhindsa. He is also 
one of my constituents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I ask all the members of this Assembly to join me 
welcoming Sikh Sangat in their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join the member from 
Regina Pasqua, and welcome the members of the Sikh Society 
of Regina Saadh. Sat sri akal. Great to see you here today. I, 
and several of the members on this side, are really looking 
forward to joining you in the Nagar Kirtan this weekend, with 
the walk from the Gurudwara to the legislature, and for the free 
food, yes. As my colleague mentions, it’s always a great chance 
to enjoy delicious food, and some great solidarity and 
companionship. So thank them for being here today, and ask the 
members to join us on Saturday if they can, and join me in 
welcoming these members to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, I’d like to introduce my two CAs 
[constituency assistant]. They can give out a little wave. 
Lavonne Lyke, Donna Petit have come down here today. They 
have the office on auto-steer and GPS [global positioning 
system] today. 
 
This is, I actually believe in all the years I’ve been here, I think 
this is the first time they’ve actually been here through question 

period. So I hope they find it very, very entertaining. And 
they’ve come to watch it live instead of watching on TV every 
day. So with that, I would ask all members to welcome them to 
their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all the Legislative Assembly, I’d like to welcome, in 
the west section, 29 grade 8 students from Canora. Give a wave. 
Along with them is teacher Colin Knight and school librarian 
Jennifer Bisschop. And the bus driver is lost. He’s MIA 
[missing in action] someplace, Mel McCormick, a good friend 
of mine. And I’d just like . . . I’m going to be meeting with 
them after and, unlike most of my colleagues, I did buy ice 
cream for them. So I will be giving you ice cream. With that, 
I’d like to get everybody to welcome them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s a hard 
act to follow. Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to stand in the 
legislature today and welcome 18 grade 12 students from A. E. 
Peacock Collegiate in my constituency of Moose Jaw. This is a 
social studies 30 class. They’re accompanied by Mrs. Carrie 
Kiefer. Mrs. Kiefer has brought a class to us every year and is 
really almost a part of the staff here at the building now. But I’d 
ask all the members to welcome these students from A.E. 
Peacock Collegiate to their Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — We’ll go with Cumberland. I recognize the 
member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
to present the petition in support of mental health and addiction 
services in the North. Northern Saskatchewan has some of the 
highest suicide rates in the country. The Children’s Advocate 
has put out a report stating the lack of services in the North. The 
suicide rate is six times higher for First Nation boys than 
non-First Nation boys between the age of 10 and 19, and 26 
times higher for First Nation girls than non-First Nation girls. 
 
And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to treat northern Saskatchewan 
residents with respect and dignity and to immediately 
invest in more mental health and wellness programs and 
facilities in the North. 
 

It is signed and supported by many good people of the North. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Francis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 



4260 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2018 

province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Alsask and 
Kindersley. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of concerned citizens that are rising up and 
speaking out against the Sask Party’s elimination of the 
Saskatchewan rental housing supplement, Sask Party 
government’s elimination of the housing supplement, an 
important support for the most vulnerable, an important support 
for people living with disabilities, an important support for 
those families living on the margins with children. 
 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to immediately restore the 
Saskatchewan rental housing supplement. 

 
These petitions are signed by folks in Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition calling on the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 
stop the Sask Party government’s attack on our kids’ already 
strained classrooms. Those who have signed this petition wish 
to draw our attention to the following: that the $54 million cut 
from our classrooms in the devastating 2017-18 budget had 
devastating impact; and that the 2018-19 budget only restores a 
fraction of last year’s devastating $54 million cut to our 
classrooms; that even though the Sask Party government is 
making us all pay more, our kids are actually getting less; and 
that these cuts have had an impact on classrooms all across the 
province, from the loss of busing for kindergarteners to the loss 
of pre-K [pre-kindergarten] programs for children with special 
needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the government to fully restore the senseless cuts to our 
kids’ classrooms and stop making families, teachers, and 
everyone who works to support our education system pay 
the price for the Sask Party government’s mismanagement. 
 

Mr. Speaker, those who have signed the petition today reside in 
Moose Jaw. I do so present. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured to rise 
today to present a petition to get big money out of 
Saskatchewan politics. The people who have signed this 
petition would like to bring to our attention the following: 
Saskatchewan’s election Act is outdated, and it allows 
corporations, unions, and individuals, even those outside the 
province, to make unlimited donations to our province’s 
political parties. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan deserve to live in a fair province 
where all voices are equal and money can’t influence politics. 
So the Sask Party leader was the only premier in the country 
who collected a special cash bonus paid for by taxpayer-funded 
subsidies and a portion of the millions in donations they collect 
from corporations and big money donors, including from 
outside of Saskatchewan. Over the past 10 years the 
Saskatchewan Party has received $12.61 million in corporate 
donations, and of that 2.87, almost $3 million coming from 
companies outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign finance laws, 
to end out-of-province donations, and put a ban on 
donations from corporations and unions, and put a 
donation limit on individual donations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed this petition today 
come from the city of Regina. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

Nurses Make a Difference 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to rise today and recognize May 7th to 13th as National 
Nursing Week. Mr. Speaker, we are fortunate to have highly 
competent, caring nurses in our province. We’ve seen those 
qualities in action recently when our province experienced the 
terrible tragedy involving the Humboldt Broncos team. The 
response of our entire health system was truly remarkable in 
those difficult circumstances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nurses of all designations are valuable members of 
our health care team. They are making a difference in many 
lives every day. Over the past decade, our province has seen 
significant increases in the number of nurses working here. We 
have over 16,000 nurses practising in Saskatchewan; that is 
about 3,700 more than 2007. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has 
923 RNs [registered nurse] per 100,000 people, well above the 
Canadian average of 796. 
 
We’ve seen the roles of nurses evolving during this time, and 
they’ve risen to the challenge. Nurses are being utilized in all 
areas of health care. Mr. Speaker, nurses play a role in our 
continued work to build a high-performing health system that 



May 10, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4261 

puts patients first. 
 
I ask all members to join me in applauding dedicated nurses for 
their service to Saskatchewan people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Non-Profit Focuses on Mental Health in the Ag Industry 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, with it being Mental Health 
Awareness Week, I wanted to highlight the amazing work of a 
movement grown right here in Saskatchewan. Do More Ag is a 
non-profit organization focusing on mental health in agriculture 
across Canada. The organization advocates for the mental 
well-being of all Canadian producers. They are helping to 
change the culture of agriculture to one where all producers are 
encouraged, supported, and empowered to take care of their 
mental well-being. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture is an industry rooted in a culture of 
hard work, resilience, strength, and stoicism, but these traits can 
also become barriers for speaking up and seeking help. 
 
Producers are vulnerable when it comes to mental health issues. 
With long hours, high stakes, isolation, and so much — from 
world commodity prices to rail efficiency, and of course the 
weather — beyond their direct control, stress, anxiety, 
depression, emotional exhaustion, and burnout are all high 
amongst producers. 
 
Do More Ag operates under three pillars: awareness, 
community, and research. As a Canada-wide non-profit, these 
pillars drive the organization’s focus, and they are making an 
impact across the industry and the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to recognize the four founders of Do More 
Ag: Kim Keller, Lesley Kelly, Himanshu Singh, and Kirk 
Muyres. This is a homegrown effort, Mr. Speaker, as these 
founding members work in the ag industry right here in 
Saskatchewan. I want to thank Do More Ag for their incredible 
work in shining a light on the need for mental health awareness 
in the ag community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
[10:15] 
 

Mental Health and Addiction Services Fun Run 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise to advise that this last Sunday I had the 
pleasure of attending the Mental Health and Addiction Services 
Fun Run in Saskatoon’s Diefenbaker Park. Mr. Speaker, with 
more than 750 participants and their families, it was truly 
remarkable. 
 
This annual event, which occurs during national Mental Health 
Awareness Week, brings attention and promotes healthy living, 
which includes being active, setting goals, and eating well to 
assist those who are in recovery. Mr. Speaker, it was a gorgeous 
day, and it was a pleasure to spend it outside with generous 
people raising awareness to support mental health and addiction 

services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government recognizes the need for timely 
access to mental health services across the province. And with a 
targeted investment of $11.4 million in this budget, we’re 
committed to improving mental health services, including 
supports for children, youth, and families. Saskatchewan also 
offers a full range of addiction treatment services, and reducing 
outpatient addiction services wait times continues to be a 
priority for our government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank everyone involved in making this event 
possible and to all those who participated. And I encourage 
everyone to join in in the Fun Run next year in Saskatoon to 
support this important cause. Awareness certainly is the key to 
help and support. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Raising Awareness About Ovarian Cancer 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Tuesday was World Ovarian Cancer Day. And tomorrow in my 
hometown of Saskatoon, an event titled The Ladyballs Show 
and Tell will be held at the Grand Salon of TCU Place to 
celebrate Ovarian Cancer Day. The Ladyballs Show and Tell is 
an evening of performance art, and will feature a live onstage 
musical performance by Michele Dubois, followed by a 
fun-filled hour of comedy by LadyBits Improv. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thousands of women are living with ovarian 
cancer in Canada. It is estimated that this year, 2,800 Canadian 
women will be newly diagnosed with this disease. Ovarian 
cancer is the fifth-most common cancer for women and is the 
most serious cancer for women, often because of late diagnosis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ovarian cancer kills five Canadian women every 
day. Over 85 per cent of ovarian cancer cases are not found 
until late stages of the disease. This year in Saskatchewan, 80 
women will be diagnosed with ovarian cancer, and 
unfortunately more than 55 will die. There is currently a 
national effort to gain $10 million in federal funding for ovarian 
cancer research. This funding would help advance 
understanding of this disease and improve treatment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in marking World 
Ovarian Cancer Day and wishing all of those putting on events 
this weekend success as they push to raise awareness about, and 
funds for, this important issue, and thanking them for their 
efforts. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 

Student Business Club Wins Award 
 
Mr. Hindley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to rise 
in the Assembly today to recognize the outstanding 
achievements of a group of high school students from Swift 
Current.  
 
Six grade 11 and 12 students from the Swift Current 
Comprehensive High School Business Club recently 



4262 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2018 

participated in the Saskatchewan Business Teachers’ 
Association competition in Saskatoon. The Swift Current group 
won the coveted School of the Year award, and what’s 
impressive, Mr. Speaker, is that this is only the third year that 
the Business Club has been around. They don’t even teach 
finance and entrepreneurship at the high school yet, so the 
students put in a lot of effort during lunch hours and after 
school, and do debate practice countless times too to get to this 
level. 
 
Cindy Lowe, who is the business education, skills and 
apprenticeship teacher at the Comp High School, said: 
 

Financial literacy and entrepreneurship are 21st century 
skills that our kids need. Students who understand 
financial literacy and budgeting have better career 
planning. They make goals for themselves and they are 
more employable. 

 
I couldn’t agree more, Mr. Speaker, which is why earlier this 
year our government announced that financial literacy classes 
will soon be available in all high schools across Saskatchewan. 
It’s an important step towards making sure that our kids have 
the best possible start to life after high school in whatever 
career path they may choose. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate the students: Harshini 
Arumugam, Megan DeJager, Michael Orthner, Abby de Gala, 
Eljay Dungca, and Anthony Merkel, and of course their 
Business Club teacher, Cindy Lowe. Congratulations on a job 
well done. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Students Excel in Space Projects 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise 
today to acknowledge extraordinary scientific achievements by 
students at the University of Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic. 
 
A team of students from these two institutions have been 
awarded $200,000 by the Canadian Space Agency to design and 
build a satellite. The satellite will involve two cubes being 
attached together, approximately the size of two Rubik’s cubes. 
The project has been dubbed SaskCube. The aim of the study is 
to learn more about how different materials degrade in space. It 
will be launched to the International Space Station in 2021. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this isn’t the only space project finding success on 
Saskatchewan campuses. The U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] space design team has built a Mars rover 
prototype which has been chosen to compete in the highly 
competitive 2018 University Rover Challenge finals in Utah. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the space design team was founded in 2005 and 
has won numerous awards for their projects, including space 
elevators, rovers, and rocket payloads. Their most recent rover 
is the Saskorpion — which I think is the best project name ever 
— the result of more than four years of hard work being done 
by dozens of undergrad students. 
 

I’d ask all members to join with me in congratulating the 
students at the University of Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic on their scientific achievements and wish them 
good luck in Utah this June. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Celebrating Mother’s Day 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Sunday, 
families from across Saskatchewan, the country, and world will 
come together to celebrate an important individual in all our 
lives. Mother’s Day offers an opportunity to shower our 
mothers in love and appreciation and reflect on all amazing 
mothers that we have come to know and respect.  
 
Whether they are biological moms, step-moms, grandmothers, 
sisters, aunts, friends, or whoever raised you, Mother’s Day is 
for all women who helped a child believe in themselves. They 
raised and nurtured us, taught us important lessons, and picked 
us up when we fell down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in this Assembly can relate to the times when 
our mothers were understanding, calming, selfless, and 
appreciative, facing challenges with determination and heart 
and a supply of cookies, band-aids, duct tape, and always room 
for one more at the table. We owe these women a debt we’ll 
never be able to repay. But breakfast in bed, a bouquet of 
flowers, a telephone call, or even a simple I love you, a hug and 
a kiss, can go a long way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope members of this Assembly take a moment 
today to say thank you to the women in their lives who love 
them in that special way only mothers can — unconditionally 
— because that’s what mothers do. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all 
members join me in wishing mothers everywhere a happy and 
peaceful Mother’s Day. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Funding for Education Capital Costs 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Parents of children at 
Argyle School in Regina are voicing serious concerns about the 
state of disrepair in the school that their children attend, a 
school that’s been awaiting provincial government approval and 
funding for a new school for a decade. 
 
Marlene Jackson, Chair of the Argyle School community 
council, understood that her daughter would be beginning 
kindergarten in a new Argyle School. Her daughter is now in 
grade 5. So a math question for the Premier, Mr. Speaker: if this 
government’s budget train has us on track to $20 billion in debt, 
what grade will Marlene Jackson’s daughter be in when Argyle 
School is finally built? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re very proud on this side of the House in terms of what the 



May 10, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4263 

commitment that this government has made to education capital 
across the province. I’ve spoken a number of times, Mr. 
Speaker, on the floor of this Assembly. Record investment in 
education capital last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a quote from the school division and it 
says that “while the school is one of our older buildings, it 
continues to be repaired at a level that we can afford to without 
compromising the safety of anyone in the building.” Mr. 
Speaker, safety is the most important thing that we take into 
account when we’re looking at our capital plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have PMR [preventative maintenance and renewal] funding 
that’s available to the school divisions, Mr. Speaker, to make 
sure that the schools are kept to a safe standard for the children 
and for the teachers that are in those schools, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to comment a little bit in terms of what 
the government’s commitment to capital has been in the city of 
Regina over the last number of years, Mr. Speaker. In 2017, Mr. 
Speaker, six schools were open, Mr. Speaker. Six joint-use 
schools were open, Mr. Speaker. Traditional builds at Sacred 
Heart, École Connaught, and Scott Collegiate, Mr. Speaker. 
These are significant commitments to the education, Mr. 
Speaker, of our children in our classrooms, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’ll continue on this side of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Funding for Teacher Salaries 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s worth pointing out 
that it’s not how much you study for the test; it’s whether you 
pass. And these schools are not passing for those students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan teachers have been without a 
contract since August of 2017. Now that process is currently 
before binding arbitration, but teachers have good reason to 
doubt that this government will actually follow through with 
any increase that may be agreed to. Because two years ago, this 
government promised teachers a 1.9 per cent pay raise, but then 
took the unprecedented step of telling school boards that they’d 
have to pay half of that raise. This amounts to negotiating with 
other people’s money, Mr. Speaker, and with school boards 
having to make up the $9 million shortfall, it represented a 
direct cut to classrooms. 
 
In committee this week the Minister of Education refused to say 
that they wouldn’t repeat the same move this year. So would the 
Premier get to his feet and assure the 13,500 members of the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation that he is as good as his 
word and that the province will fully fund teachers’ salaries 
rather than pulling essential funds out of classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, this government is 
committed to negotiating in good faith with respect to the 
teachers, Mr. Speaker. And as the Leader of the Opposition has 
mentioned, Mr. Speaker, we’re in arbitration at the present time, 
Mr. Speaker. But there’s no contract to talk about, Mr. Speaker. 
So at that point in time, Mr. Speaker, we’ll certainly give 
consideration to what the needs are with respect to servicing 

that contract, Mr. Speaker, but it’s premature to talk about this 
at the present time. 
 
We’re certainly in the middle, Mr. Speaker, of going through 
estimates, talking about our budget commitments in this budget 
year, Mr. Speaker. And when that contract is negotiated, Mr. 
Speaker, that will be a conversation that we have on this side of 
the House, Mr. Speaker, certainly taking into account, as we 
always do, Mr. Speaker, the needs of the children in the 
classroom and always, Mr. Speaker — always, Mr. Speaker — 
paying respect to the teachers and the educational professionals 
that provide the services to those very children. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier was 
elected leader of his party on a commitment to invest in 
education. Now while that commitment has proven to be 
half-hearted in terms of the money returned to the system, there 
are other opportunities. There’s a chance to reset relations with 
our province’s teachers and school boards, but that chance 
won’t last forever. 
 
With binding arbitration ahead, will the Premier commit that his 
government won’t repeat that unprecedented move in 2016 of 
forcing the school boards to pay half the raises? It is in no way 
premature, Mr. Speaker, to commit to not pulling funds out of 
our classrooms. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, just this year, two and a half 
billion dollars into our Ministry of Education, Mr. Speaker. We 
fully have invested in not only the infrastructure in 40 new 
schools and 25 major renovations across the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we’ve invested in teachers. We’ve 
invested in our educational supports in the classrooms, Mr. 
Speaker, 840 more teachers in our classrooms across our great 
province, training and educating our best and brightest for the 
next generation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the member opposite is correct. We committed, Mr. 
Speaker, to put dollars directly into our classroom, Mr. Speaker. 
We committed to putting $30 million, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 
that we can have 400 support staff in those classrooms so that 
each child receives the education that they have a right to in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. We jumped ahead with that 
commitment, Mr. Speaker, into the final quarter of last fiscal 
year, with a seven and a half million dollar funding. And it was 
in the budget the other day, Mr. Speaker. We’d ask the 
members opposite to support that budget. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Provincial Sales Tax on Used Vehicles 
 
Ms. Beck: — Still no commitment to fully fund that teachers’ 
contract. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier this week I asked the Sask Party 
government why they’re charging PST [provincial sales tax] on 
used vehicles sold before April the 11th. The minister said that 
anyone caught in that bind could just call a number and the PST 



4264 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2018 

would be waived. Perhaps the minister could check with 
SaskTel to see if 1-800-doubles-tax is still available. 
 
The exemption is welcome news, but it’s news nonetheless to 
insurance brokers that I’ve been speaking with. No one working 
in insurance knew that they could call to have the tax waived. 
Will the Minister for SGI [Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance] make sure that brokers selling SGI products know 
about the pre-budget exemption? Or is he happy to leave them 
in the dark and see the extra revenues keep rolling in from this 
unfair tax hike? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If there is a 
need to reach out to brokers so that they have the number for 
Finance to call, I’ll ask the officials to please check into that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, there’s an easy way for the Sask 
Party government to make all of this confusion around the PST 
on used cars go away. They could scrap it. It was their own 
leader, Mr. Speaker, who said that charging PST over and over 
again on the same used car was just “dumb.” 
 
Back in 2008, the Finance minister posted a list of her 
achievements on the website. That list has not aged well. 
Eliminating the PST on used cars? Eliminated. Creation of 
Enterprise Saskatchewan? Gone. New labour legislation to 
protect essential services and ensure more democratic 
workplaces? Well that trip to the Supreme Court didn’t go so 
well for them. Stronger balanced budget legislation? We now 
have no balanced budget legislation. Paying down the 
provincial debt? It’s set to triple from 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what happened along the way? How did the Sask 
Party government lose its way so badly? 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, what the member 
opposite failed to also mention is our commitment to 
individuals with disabilities, Mr. Speaker, creating a program 
such as SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability], 
something the members opposite never did. It was our 
commitment to education, as mentioned earlier by our 
Education minister. An unprecedented number of schools have 
been built in this province instead of closing 176 schools, Mr. 
Speaker. We have a commitment to health care where we’re 
now building hospitals instead of just promising hospitals, Mr. 
Speaker. And along with that, Mr. Speaker, we have decreased 
personal income taxes in an unprecedented level that this 
province has ever seen, making life more affordable for 
Saskatchewan citizens, Mr. Speaker. They now pay less income 
tax than they did when the members opposite were government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those are things that we have been able to do for Saskatchewan 
people, and through that we’ve experienced unprecedented 
population growth. The member opposite also forgot to mention 

that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Funding for Wildfire Management 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, communities across the 
province are concerned about the risk of another serious 
wildfire season. Thanks to dry, windy conditions and a rapid 
melt, our wildfire season has already started and much of the 
province is at risk. Despite increasing serious wildfire seasons 
in communities across Saskatchewan in recent years, last 
month’s budget didn’t provide an increase for emergency 
management and fire safety, and actually cut wildfire 
management by more than $6 million. 
 
How can we be cutting this funding when we need it more than 
ever? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I provided these answers to the media just a 
couple of days ago. I’d be happy to provide them in estimates 
when we move to the Ministry of Environment estimates. But, 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll provide the answers right now. 
 
The operations on the wildfire branch budget on terms of 
operations, in terms of actually fighting fires, is up from last 
budget, Mr. Speaker. In fact we’ve doubled the dollars to 
wildfire mitigation programs. That includes for sprinkler 
systems. That includes for reducing the fuel source around 
communities. That part of the budget has actually increased. 
 
The $6 million decrease in the budget is on the capital, because 
the most recent CL-215T conversion program that’s actually 
upgrading the planes, that program has now come to an end 
because the last plane in that program has now been upgraded. 
So we don’t need the capital dollars because there isn’t another 
CL-215T to upgrade, Mr. Speaker. That’s why that part of the 
budget has been reduced. But in terms of operations, it’s 
actually up this year. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, northerners have concerns 
about what could be another devastating wildfire season in the 
North. The communities of La Ronge and Pelican Narrows 
have not forgotten the forest fires that threaten their 
communities. And this year the wildfire season is already in full 
swing. Government officials say Pelican Narrow fires will burn 
for many years to come. The community of Pelican Narrows 
raised concerns about training and resources for firefighters last 
year. What is the government going to do to get ahead of these 
fires and provide supports for northern communities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I am pleased to report that we have a wildfire task 
force that is working in conjunction with the FSIN [Federation 
of Sovereign Indigenous Nations] as well as the Prince Albert 



May 10, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4265 

Grand Council. Mr. Speaker, they’ve made a number of 
recommendations, and I’m pleased to say that not only are we 
increasing the operations budget this year for the branch in 
terms of actually fighting those fires, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
doubled the amount of dollars for mitigation for communities to 
provide for additional sprinkler systems for reducing the fuel 
load around sources of value, Mr. Speaker. So that’s good 
news. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, the task force has identified and made 
recommendations in terms of the fire crews, Mr. Speaker. And 
what we are doing this year, Mr. Speaker, we’re actually 
increasing the number of firefighters’ crew size from five up to 
eight members per team, Mr. Speaker. This is, I think, 
something that has been very welcomed by not only our task 
force, PAGC [Prince Albert Grand Council], the FSIN, as well 
as, Mr. Speaker, communities in the area. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Global Transportation Hub and  
Freedom of Information Law 

 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government loves 
to talk about how they’re the party that respects the rule of law, 
but their actions just don’t back it up. They refuse to follow the 
freedom of information law when it came to a request for the 
Husky pipeline inspections, and they’re refusing to say if they’ll 
follow the Information and Privacy Commissioner’s 
recommendations when it comes to the records at the GTH 
[Global Transportation Hub]. The recommendations are crystal 
clear — follow the law; release the records. These are public 
records, and people have a right to know what is going on at the 
GTH. 
 
How can the Sask Party government claim to champion the rule 
of law when they won’t commit to following the 
recommendations of the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 
opposite for the question. I share the concerns that she has that 
we expect all of our agencies to comply fully with the 
legislation. The GTH is now compliant with the legislation. 
They’re dealing with the periods that they’ve got to share 
information with the Privacy Commissioner. The Ministry of 
Justice has sent people over to the GTH with a view to trying to 
make sure that they do comply fully, that they deal with things 
in a proper and expeditious manner. 
 
I think all of us should be aware that there are two competing 
interests here. One is the commercially sensitive information 
that exists. We want to be able to make sure that we’re able to 
be competitive and remain in a position to be able to attract new 
tenants to the area. And secondly, we all have to be very 
mindful that this is taxpayer dollars that are being spent there, 
and we want to make sure that we’ve got the maximum amount 
of openness, transparency, and accountability, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Nice to hear that 
response for once today. The minister, however, was giving me 
a hard time earlier this week for calling for changes to the 
freedom of information law. But it’s because of this 
government’s track record of burying, blocking, and denying 
access to information requests that has people calling for new 
protections. When the commissioner says a record should be 
released, complying shouldn’t be optional. 
 
We believe in openness, transparency, and accountability, and 
that the commissioner should have the power to order 
documents be made public. Why can’t the Minister of Justice 
support that? Why doesn’t he believe the Information and 
Privacy Commissioner should have the power to force 
government to release public documents? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have enormous respect 
for the good work that’s done by the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner in our province. The Privacy Commissioner 
provides guidance, provides direction, and consults with 
different agencies throughout government. We support, value, 
and respect the work that he does and want to encourage that 
that would continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the question that’s posed by the 
member opposite, there are certain things that are commercially 
sensitive that deal with personnel matters and everything, and 
we will continue to work with the Privacy Commissioner to 
make sure that things are released where it’s appropriate. But at 
the end of the day, it’s the government that’s responsible to 
protect things that are commercially sensitive or deal with 
personnel or deal with health records, and we’re going to 
continue to do that. I appreciate the point the member’s making, 
but at the end of the day the ultimate responsibility lies with 
government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Support for Post-Secondary Institutions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, student athletes joined us 
this week to fight for their programs to continue at the U of R 
[University of Regina], programs being eliminated due to the 
underfunding and cuts of that government. The minister assured 
this Assembly and students their scholarships would be 
honoured, but that just simply isn’t how this is playing out. 
Students have been left with the choice of accessing their 
hard-earned scholarship support or pursuing their athletic 
careers. Not both, because those scholarships can’t be 
transferred. 
 
Students shouldn’t be left with a choice to choose between 
following their athletic dreams, their investment in their 
academic program, and being able to pay for school. Does this 
government not understand the position years of cuts have put 
our institutions in and the devastating impact that they’re 
having on students across Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 



4266 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2018 

Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker, and I thank the member opposite for the question. You 
know, I did meet with students following their visit here in the 
legislature last week, or earlier this week, and I did share what I 
heard in those meetings with members of the university 
institution. 
 
As the member opposite knows full well, the universities are 
autonomous institutions. The University of Regina Act is pretty 
clear in section 61 that the business and management and 
operation of the institution is vested in the board and in the 
leadership of that institution, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it is this government that 
has cut millions of dollars from the U of R’s budget — 
$6 million in less than two years — and they need to own the 
impact for their choices. The university had actually told that 
government well in advance of budget that they needed a 3.3 
per cent increase to maintain status quo after the devastating 
cuts that they received. Instead they got zeros. The operating 
grant this year is lower than it was in 2014. This doesn’t keep 
pace with inflation, salaries, or the half million extra dollars that 
they’re paying due to the government’s choice around the PST. 
 
This government can’t starve our valuable institutions and then 
wipe their hands of the damage that they’re causing or the 
tuition hikes that they’re creating. When will this government 
start seeing post-secondary education for the priority that it 
needs to be, an investment in our future, and stop these 
devastating cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. There was a lot in that question, so I’ll try to deal with 
as many of the points as I can. When you compare the last 11 
years of total operating funding under the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] to our record over the last 11 years, the 
government has cumulatively provided the University of Regina 
with $475 million more, or 74 per cent more, in operating funds 
to that institution, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would also add that we learned this week I think — and I was 
glad to hear it — that the University of Regina is adding faculty 
positions in the Faculty of Social Work, in the Faculty of 
Kinesiology and Health Studies, in the faculty of computer 
science, Mr. Speaker, and also in the Faculty of Engineering. 
We’re going to work very hard with our institutions over the 
coming years as partners in this place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan already has 
the highest number of youth who aren’t working or in school in 
Canada, and this government’s making matters worse because 
of their cuts and their underfunding, Mr. Speaker — $6 million 
in just two years. 
 

The U of R announced this week they’re hiking tuition by 2.8 
per cent in response to the provincial budget. U of S has already 
hiked their tuition by 4.8 per cent. This is the 10th increase to 
tuition since it was frozen in 2008. Unsustainable for students 
and real barriers for so many. Meanwhile this government has 
slashed scholarship funding, ended the education savings grant, 
and cut student aid supports that could help students get by. 
 
These persistent deep cuts will have long-term consequences 
for these students and the institutions, our institutions as a 
whole. When can they expect an end to the austerity approach 
of this government? When will this government make higher 
education and students the priority they deserve to be? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about the 
changes that we made to the student loan program in the last 
year, Mr. Speaker. Those changes that were made to the student 
loan program, Mr. Speaker, now provide an upfront grant to 
students who are the lowest-income students and those who are 
in most need in our province. And not only that, Mr. Speaker, 
but I would add the number of loans to those students has gone 
up by 18.6 per cent and they’ve increased the amount of money 
that they’re getting by 8.1 per cent, Mr. Speaker. That means 
we’re supporting the students who need it the most, better, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Crown Land Incentive 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the government’s Crown land 
incentive has farmers grappling with skyrocketing rents on land 
leases. Over the last three years, the levy rent formula has 
increased from 15 per cent to 45 per cent as a part of the 
government’s effort to try to push renters out. These changes 
hurt producers who can’t or don’t want to buy the land. 
Producers, some who have farmed the same land for 
generations, are seeing their rents skyrocket. In just one case, a 
Carlyle-area farmer saw his rent climb by over 100 per cent in 
just the last four years. 
 
[10:45] 
 
How can the government justify forcing the hand of producers 
by artificially inflating land rents? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member for the question. Owning agricultural land that has no 
higher public benefit, either ecological, sand and gravel, oil and 
gas, or heritage value, is not a core function of government, and 
not a good use of government resources. Mr. Speaker, we 
campaigned on selling this kind of land in 2007 and we’ve 
since, starting in 2008, we’ve run a series of programs where 
we sell land with price incentives on it to make it easier for 
producers. And on the other side of that, Mr. Speaker, we have 
continued to raise rents on certain types of land like the ones 
I’ve described that have no additional value for public 
ownership by increasing the rents to some extent. 



May 10, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4267 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Provincial Budget and Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the Sask Party 
government is anxious to fill the big hole in their budget and to 
make better choices looking at the long term and climbing, 
tripling of debt in this province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t producers renting Crown land who 
wasted millions at the GTH in a land deal that saw the Sask 
Party government supporters profit. It wasn’t producers who 
allowed the costs at Regina bypass to spiral out of control from 
400 million to 2 billion. And it wasn’t producers who chose to 
triple the debt since 2007. That responsibility lies solely with 
this Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, and producers 
shouldn’t have to be the ones to pay the price for their bad 
management through higher and higher land lease prices. 
 
How can the Minister of Agriculture justify making producers 
across our province pay for their decade-long run of 
mismanagement and failed megaprojects? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — It’s not producers, Mr. Speaker, that will 
ever pay an NDP opposition who support a Trudeau carbon tax 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the outset of the opening of the legislature, one 
of the very first questions was about doing politics differently, 
Mr. Speaker. We’ve worked very hard engaging across the 
province in this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker. And we had the 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker, calling for investments into 
our classrooms, Mr. Speaker. Well that box has been checked, 
Mr. Speaker, with investments into our classrooms and into 
early child care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We heard calls for those struggling with autism spectrum 
disorder, Mr. Speaker. We see an investment in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, in individualized funding for autism. Calls for 
increases in CBO [community-based organization] funding for 
the front lines, the services in our communities, Mr. Speaker. 
Done in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, further investment into a long-term care facility in 
La Ronge, Mr. Speaker. Other supports in the North that we 
heard to date. Mr. Speaker, none of those provided by an NDP 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We ask the members opposite: let’s do politics differently here 
. . . [inaudible] . . . Let’s stand and support this budget 
unanimously in this House next week. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Steinley: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Walsh Acres has asked for 
leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
with great pleasure I take a couple minutes to introduce a guest 
in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. My cousin Kevin’s down from 
Rush Lake, and we both grew up on a dairy and beef farm in 
Rush Lake, Saskatchewan. And there is three boys in his 
family, and I had a brother and two sisters, so we had seven 
kids. So Kevin’s more like a brother to me than a cousin. And 
we grew up together and I’m happy he could make it down. He 
came down to bring his father down for a couple of 
appointments. And I just want to say thank you for all you’ve 
done for me in my life, Kevin. He was a good big brother, and I 
appreciate everything. And welcome to your Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 

Supports for Mental Health and Addictions 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 
enter this important debate today. At the end of my remarks, I 
will move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly take action to further supports for 
mental health and addictions across the province, but 
particularly in northern Saskatchewan where the rates of 
suicide are alarming and services are extremely limited. 

 
Mr. Speaker, before I start out, I just . . . It’s been very 
challenging as a member serving the Cumberland constituency, 
and I say that it’s a tough time. And sometimes I want to say 
I’ve supported many of the families who have suffered the loss 
of a loved one, our youth to suicide. 
 
In northern Saskatchewan. . . And I know in the rest of the 
province, our heart goes out to anyone that loses a loved one 
from suicide. But in northern Saskatchewan, you know, I look 
at the rates amongst our First Nations. And I’m going to get into 
some of the stats and some of that information. 
 
But I just want to start out with saying my heart goes out to 
many of those families and community members who have to 
suffer and have gone through the loss of a loved one. Honestly, 
when you’re meeting with families — whether it’s a mushom, a 
kohkom, an aunt, an uncle, a sibling, a mother, a father — and 
you’re supporting them in the community, the loss of their 
loved one, it’s tough to find the words. And sometimes you just 
need to give them the hug and let them know . . . the hand, a 
touch. The community shows up to support them. The 
leadership shows up supporting them. 
 
And we’re going to get into, you know, a debate about whether 
the government is doing enough. The government, you know, at 
the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, likes to pat themselves on the 
back. And today, you know, I kind of been introducing and 
bringing forward the concerns in the petition asking for more 



4268 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2018 

mental health and addictions services in the North. And 
particularly . . . I know the issue, addictions, is throughout the 
province and I don’t take away from the families and those 
communities that are dealing with addictions, mental health, 
and suicide. 
 
But if you look at northern Saskatchewan, if you look at First 
Nations . . . And like I’ve said in the petition, it’s 6 times higher 
for First Nation boys to commit suicide than non-First Nation; 
26 times higher for First Nations girls than non-First Nations 
girls to commit suicide. It’s in the child advocate’s report. It is 
alarming. And it is a crisis, and it’s so hard to . . .  
 
And I’m going to get through some of the concerns that have 
come forward from many of the leaders. They’re advocating 
that more needs to be done. And whether it’s the front-line 
workers, whether it’s the child advocate, whether it’s our 
northern leaders, whether it’s the mayors, our First Nations 
leader, our Métis, whether it’s families. And I’ve asked some of 
the families, I’m going to make some comments at the end 
because I’ve asked permission. I’ll make a few comments. 
 
You know, it is a crisis, and the government has an obligation 
and the government needs to take this serious. And you know, 
the government can say, oh, there’s more work to be done. I’ve 
heard that. And they can read a member’s statement that they 
gave in a few million dollars more. But it is a crisis when it 
comes to suicide in northern Saskatchewan. The government no 
longer can say there’s more work to be done. There is not one 
family member, Mr. Speaker, not one family member that I 
would know that would say they would want to feel comfort 
from hearing the government say, we know there’s more work 
to be done. That just doesn’t cut it anymore. 
 
When someone is looking for supports, whether they’re a youth, 
whether they’re somebody who’s dealing with addictions and 
mental health, what they’re looking for is . . . They don’t want 
excuses to, well maybe we can get you in in three weeks. 
Maybe we can get you in six months. Maybe we can get you 
into a detox and then the treatment. Maybe we can get a mental 
health worker, a psychiatrist. The needs . . . When those 
community members are in a crisis, they’re in a crisis now. 
They don’t want excuses, and they don’t want governments to 
say, but look, we’ve done so much for you. 
 
And I want to say this to the government: they like to pat 
themselves on the back. But this issue is a crisis, and if they 
don’t wake up . . . We’re losing so many youth, and it doesn’t 
have to be that way. As long as at the end of the day, as anyone, 
as the MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] I think, 
leaders . . . And I can’t speak for the families who have lost 
loved ones, but I would think as long as they know that there 
was the supports there when they needed them, when that 
young person needed it, when they needed those supports, Mr. 
Speaker, that they could get those supports. That’s crucial, 
whether it was mental health, addictions, treatment. They would 
want to know that, you know, their loved one had an 
opportunity. 
 
And the schools, I think about the schools. The schools do great 
work and they try their best. And every community, I give them 
credit, the front-line workers, the social workers, the mental 
health workers. Those front-line workers, they’re exhausted. 

You see the work they’re trying to do. It cannot be easy. They 
know they need more resources. 
 
The list goes on, and I think we’re going to see, as I go through 
some of the comments that came from the child advocate in his 
report about the crisis that’s going on, we no longer and the 
governments can no longer . . . We need to work on this with all 
the leaders, with the government, with opposition. We no 
longer can put our heads in the sand and wish it away and go 
away. This is a crisis and the government needs to respond as a 
crisis. We as a province need to respond as a crisis and find out 
what can we do better. 
 
And I’m going to comment a little bit, Mr. Speaker, about some 
of the comments that in the child advocate’s report, you know, 
just some of the stuff that . . . One area he refers to is the 
government should fully implement Jordan’s principle. And 
let’s be very clear. Take the jurisdiction out of it. There 
shouldn’t be, well you’re on-reserve, off-reserve. You live here; 
you live there. There should be no jurisdiction when it comes to 
this. When the services are provided, we have to provide the 
service. 
 
And you know, and I think about some of the areas where I 
think that needs to be implemented, but it can’t be implemented 
in a way, well we’ll pick and choose how we’re going to use 
Jordan’s principle. I think it was very clear: we’ll make sure 
we’ll act on children, we’ll act on the services that are needed 
from federal and provincial, different jurisdictions. It don’t 
matter. We’ll figure out who’s going to pay the bill once we get 
there but we’ll make sure the services are provided. I think that 
is so important and that was in this thing. 
 
The government should partner with FSIN to develop a suicide 
strategy for First Nations. That’s clear in the child’s advocate 
report, again a recommendation he’s making. I hope the 
government will move on that. I really do. At the end of the 
day, take the politics out of it, as some people have said to me, 
and let’s do the right thing and let’s get those partnerships going 
with the organizations that are advocating for this when it 
comes to many of our residents of this province. 
 
It also stated in that report the government should partner with 
the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan to implement their suicide 
strategy and to look at this. So there are many things that the 
report is recommending. Again this government has a choice. 
Government’s had a choice with all the money. We’re talking 
about $14 billion a year that this government has to decide how 
it wants to spend it. 
 
You know what? I say that this government could say, if they 
really wanted to say, we have a crisis when it comes to the 
suicide rates amongst First Nations and the North, and it’s 
alarming and we’re going to act upon that and we’re going to be 
meaningful about that in a partnership. And we’re going to sit 
down with First Nations and Métis and the rest of the province 
and we’re going to target that as the crisis that it is. It is. 
 
What does it say when different agencies and groups come 
forward with, I guess, suggestions to the government saying, 
here’s a way we found that might be able to help some young 
people to stay focused and stay out of trouble. 
 



May 10, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4269 

I think about our trappers. They put in a proposal to try to work 
with, you know, at-risk youth in different areas to try to bring 
them on the trapline. They applied for, I think the grant was 
$180, and they got refused. Like to get refused to try to work 
with the youth. And they said they would be accountable for the 
dollars and stuff, but it didn’t work. The government didn’t 
have a hundred and eighty or ninety thousand dollars at the time 
that . . . [inaudible]. 
 
So I just start thinking about some of the stuff and the wants 
that people have brought forward. And I know there are good 
people out there doing the good work and they’re sitting around 
trying to find out — whether they’re front-line workers, 
whoever they are, leaders — and they’re coming with ideas and 
plans. Here’s some suggestions that the government could take, 
whether to assist with this. 
 
But again sometimes it’s hard to get government to try to assist. 
And the frustration I’ve seen. And you could do, they could do 
certain things. I know the government could do a study and 
we’ve seen all that. I think we need some action. It’s time for 
some serious action. No more let’s talk about it again, let’s have 
a meeting about it. The leaders, families, those that are 
struggling the most in mental health and addictions need help 
now. 
 
If we see the crisis . . . And when I talk about addictions too, 
Mr. Speaker, the addictions, and we see mental health . . . It’s 
all related: addictions, mental health. And then we see the rise 
in HIV [human immunodeficiency virus], hepatitis C — it’s 
alarming. And some of the doctors are calling it out and saying, 
we need to respond to this. And it is the mental health; it’s 
addictions. Let’s look what . . . So they’re making 
recommendations and I hope at the end of the day the 
government will take this serious because it is a crisis going on. 
 
And government can no longer, with all the money at their 
disposal, say, well this is our priority. You know, this is where 
we’re going to spend the money. This is where the money . . . 
When you see you have a crisis . . . And that’s what I hope they 
understand after today’s debate, Mr. Speaker. They, the 
government understands that there is a crisis when it comes to 
suicides, addictions, mental health, and that the government, at 
the end of the day, has not done enough and it needs to deal 
with this as a crisis. 
 
[11:00] 
 
So I think about the youth. And let’s say, when I talk about this, 
the youth also made some recommendations and the child 
advocate in his report talked about the youth and, you know, the 
calls to action from the youth. These are from the youth in the 
report, and I think about that. They would like programs to stop 
bullying and some schools are doing that. They are. I’ve been to 
their . . . It’s amazing to watch some of the schools and the 
buy-in to stop bulling. They’re trying. 
 
I made a member’s statement about empathy, some of the 
programs being done to show empathy amongst students. And I 
did a member’s statement, and it’s amazing to watch that 
program. I got to see first-hand that program.  
 
So these are some of the things that the youth are asking for, 

increased positive emotional supports. There’s different things 
that can come forward, you know: addressing drugs and alcohol 
in the schools, with giving supports to the schools and to the 
addiction mental health to go into the schools to make sure they 
are talking about addictions and drugs, so they have a good 
understanding. 
 
Again we always say that we know that, you know, parents 
want to make sure what we’re introducing, that they give 
permission to it. And the schools take care of that. They make 
sure permission slips are signed and all that to do with that. So 
that just goes to address . . . 
 
The other area, you know, the youth themselves say, keep youth 
safe. Like youth want to be safe. They want to know they’re 
safe. They’re bullied, they feel . . . If they’re not feeling safe, it 
is causing mental health. It causes them so much grief and 
sometimes we don’t know why. And some people don’t know 
why we lose the loved ones and people commit suicide. Nobody 
knows. Sometimes people try to . . . [inaudible] . . . and they’re 
trying to find answers. And I know sometimes it’s hard, and 
nobody has the answers for them sometimes. 
 
But like I say the youth, again, they want to make sure that 
there’s activities for the youth in communities. Every time 
government make cuts to any program that takes care of youth 
or helps the community with recreation, every time you make a 
decision around that big table of budget, you have issues. And it 
hurts. So I want to say that. The need again, as I’ve talked 
about, for so much more when it comes to mental health and 
addictions services throughout the province, and I think about 
rural, remote, urbans, there’s many areas of that. 
 
The one thing I want to make . . . And I’ve asked some of the 
parents and I said this, I’ve asked next time I have to go support 
a family of loss of a loved one to suicide — our youth or 
whoever through suicide because of mental health and 
addictions — I’m going to ask permission. I’ve already got 
permission of some to bring . . . I usually go to the funerals. I 
pay my respects to the family. We support them. We get funeral 
cards. I will be bringing those funeral cards and delivering to 
three members on the other side: the Premier, the two Health 
ministers. To understand and to see the hurt that is going on, 
that communities are dealing with, I think it’s important to 
share that with them, to get permission and do that forward. I 
think it’s important. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at the end of my comments, I had said I was 
going to, you know, move the motion. So getting close to the 
time where I think it’s important that I get to that. But again I 
think this is a crisis we have to move. So, Mr. Speaker, I move 
the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly take action to further supports for 
mental health and addictions across the province, but 
particularly in northern Saskatchewan where the rates of 
suicide are alarming and services are extremely limited. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved: 
 



4270 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2018 

That this Assembly take further action to further supports 
for mental health and addictions across the province, but 
particularly in northern Saskatchewan where the rates of 
suicide are alarming and services are extremely limited. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Regina Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to rise in the House today to speak to the motion 
that the members opposite have put forward. And I will also 
read the motion as presented: 
 

That this Assembly take action to further support for 
mental health and addictions across the province, but 
particularly in northern Saskatchewan where the rates of 
suicide are alarming and services are extremely limited. 
 

Mr. Speaker, while we recognize and respect the motion put 
forward by the members opposite, the motion also fails to 
recognize that our government is taking action to increase 
supports for mental health and addiction services across the 
province, including the North. 
 
While the motion raises an important issue and one our 
government takes very seriously, we cannot support the motion 
put forward as the members have put forward. Mr. Speaker, our 
government is spending 330 million within the Ministry of 
Health on mental health and addictions. Mr. Speaker, that is an 
increase of 52 per cent since 2007 since the Saskatchewan Party 
formed government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I was elected by the residents of Regina 
Rochdale to speak on their behalf. And does that mean that only 
the residents of my riding matter to me, and their concerns, and 
my concerns? Absolutely not, Mr. Speaker. Each and every one 
of us is elected and we should want to do what’s best for the 
whole province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have family and friends living across the 
province and, Mr. Speaker, when they are grieving a loss from 
suicide or know someone who is suffering from addictions, 
there is no geographical boundary that separates us. Mr. 
Speaker, each and every one of us know of someone very close 
to us who suffers from mental health issues or suffers from an 
addition. For way too long, persons who suffer from mental 
illness suffered in silence, and too many of our friends have lost 
the battle to addiction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a very good friend of mine, Dave Batters, in 2009 
— he was my friend, he was my MP [Member of Parliament], 
but he was someone who suffered in silence — and he took his 
life. His wife, Denise Batters, has been very, very vocal in 
saying we need to do more, but we need to speak out. And I’ve 
been very pleased to be able to help her with raising funds for 
mental health because, Mr. Speaker, many of us left behind, we 
also suffer. We suffer from the loss. We suffer from the guilt. 
Could I have done more? What could I have done to help? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, today many people are speaking up, and 
they’re asking for the help they need. And, Mr. Speaker, our 
government, this government, is listening. That’s why we have 
invested in more funding for more full-time positions in mental 

health and addictions. As I stated, Mr. Speaker, we have 
increased the funding by 52 per cent since we formed 
government. 
 
We also have very close family members. My niece, Linda 
Joan, she suffered from alcoholism, and she died. She left 
behind my sister-in-law who was broken-hearted, her children 
who were broken-hearted because they lost their mom. 
 
I mean, Mr. Speaker, we know that there’s communities in the 
North, we know there’s individuals in the North who suffer 
personally. And our hearts go out to everyone who’s lost 
someone from suicide or mental health issues. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we are working to make sure that those who require 
support receive them. The Ministry of Health, Education, and 
Social Services continue to work with our federal and our First 
Nations partners to make sure that any response to suicide is 
coordinated, but it’s immediately. 
 
And the Saskatchewan Health Authority continues to provide 
support for young people at risk of suicide. They are working 
with schools, the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police], the 
First Nations bands, to identify urgent cases and how best to 
respond. And the Ministry of Health participates in the 
Embracing Life Committee, which focuses on building 
community capacity to prevent suicides. 
 
A northern training and resource registry is being developed so 
that northern communities can find the mental health and 
suicide prevention supports available from all agencies in a 
single location. Over the past two years, the Ministry of Health 
has provided the former Keewatin, Mamawetan health regions 
with $350,000 in additional funding to support community 
suicide prevention initiatives. 
 
Suicide prevention protocols have been fully implemented in 
northern mental health and addiction services. To date, 93 
human service staff have been trained in mental health first aid, 
228 have received Applied Suicide Intervention Skills Training, 
and 46 have been trained in safeTALK [safe tell, ask, listen and 
keep safe]. The Saskatchewan Health Authority hired a 
community suicide prevention coordinator to provide ongoing 
support to the Saskatchewan Health Authority, Mental Health 
Commission of Canada, our First Nations partners in La Ronge 
area. 
 
Communities across the North are taking initiative. Just last 
night in Pinehouse Lake — as many know, my family lives 
there — 40 members from the community got together. And it 
was a wonderful meeting, but it was a very emotional meeting. 
Forty members got together from the community. These are 
leaders, these are just folks who said we have to do more. And 
they were focusing in on discussing the issues of crystal meth in 
their community. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, these members, they didn’t just sit around and 
complain. They said, let’s figure out what do we need to do. 
Who do we need to work with? Well they know they need to 
work with the schools. They know they need to work with their 
community leaders, the RCMP, the government. But you know 
who else they decided they needed to work with? They needed 
to work with the dealers, the drug dealers. They needed to work 
with the addicts. 



May 10, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4271 

And, Mr. Speaker, after that meeting, do you know what they 
did? A couple of members from that committee went and they 
met with one of the meth dealers. And they said to him, what 
can we do to help you out of this situation? Now, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s positive. That’s community leaders taking on an initiative 
because they know they can’t do it by themselves. So what do 
they do? They roll up their sleeves and they are working to get 
the job done. Mr. Speaker, that wasn’t the first meeting that 
community has had. That was the third meeting where members 
from the community, who are concerned, who want a better 
community, have taken action. 
 
They also have taken action by having what they call Recovery 
Lake, which is a camp which focuses on the addictions of the 
individual. But they said, you know what, you can’t just treat 
the individual. The whole family is being affected. So what do 
they do? The whole family goes to Recovery Lake and they 
work through the addiction issues together. Mr. Speaker, this is 
a positive initiative but this is coming from the grassroots, from 
the communities. What does this mean, Mr. Speaker? It means 
that people are taking control of their lives. Communities, 
communities are taking action. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why it’s so important that our 
communities like Pinehouse Lake and Sandy Bay have 
developed critical incident and trauma response teams. Sandy 
Bay has also opened up a family resource centre, focusing on 
early childhood development. And Lac La Ronge Indian Band 
is partnering with the Red Cross to develop community-safe 
planning and introduce suicide prevention training to the 
schools in the area. And the Prince Albert Grand Council is 
providing suicide prevention and support training for teachers, 
RCMP, and Family Services worker at Deschambault Lake. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is focused on how do we help 
northern communities. Our northern communities have not been 
overlooked. Mr. Speaker, just this past week, we had a group of 
students from northern Saskatchewan that were participating in 
the Charles Knight student leadership program. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s programs like this where students have the opportunity to 
learn leadership. And through that leadership, they have the 
opportunity to be mentors, mentors to their peers, because we 
know who best to talk to youth is youth themselves. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this is why programs such as this, the Charles Knight 
youth leadership program, is the backbone. That’s how we 
ensure that students who are suffering in silence have the 
opportunity to seek help. 
 
And so that’s why, Mr. Speaker, the intention of the emotion is 
good, but it does not fulfill, and it does not address the issues 
that the government has looked at in response to suicide and 
addictions, and specifically, in the North. So thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s an 
honour today to enter into this very important 75-minute debate. 
Mr. Speaker, I have had the honour to work in mental health 
and addiction services for over a decade, and so I’ve seen, 

first-hand, the benefits of providing services to youth where 
they feel most comfortable to access them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I worked at mental health, one of 
my first jobs was to go work in the high schools. And so I 
worked with the youth there and I had, at times, about 40 to 50 
youth on my caseload, which wasn’t uncommon, but was very 
important. And the biggest thing I noticed was when you were 
working in that environment, the youth saw you there. 
 
I would go and help out at intramurals. I would participate just 
like any of the teachers there. I would go when they had their 
fundraisers. I was really active in there, so the students got to 
know you on a personal level. They got trust you, and that is so 
very important when you’re working with youth. They need to 
have that level of trust in who they’re talking with. And it takes 
a long time to build those relationships, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And so I did that work for, I believe it was five to six years, and 
through the years you developed some really good relationships 
with the youth. And they would come, and after they were even 
done school, come and seek me out to come and talk to me and 
share some of their exciting life events. 
 
And so when I got a permanent job with the health region, it 
was in forensic services. So that brought me into the outpatient 
department, and so I had to leave the schools. And I would tell 
the youth that they were more than welcome to come and see 
me in the outpatient services. But very few came because those 
youth have some issues with transportation. A lot of the youth I 
was working with, their families aren’t in a healthy position to 
be able to make appointments or were unable to make those 
arrangements. So that’s why providing the services in the 
schools was so important. 
 
But with saying that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I remember 
particularly one youth that I worked with. And it took a long 
time to get the trust of that particular youth. But I was in my 
outpatient services and I got a phone call from the front desk. 
And the lady said, there’s a gentleman here to see you. He says 
it’s an emergency. And I actually had a cancellation, so I was 
able to bring him in. And this young man found out his 
girlfriend was pregnant and this was a major issue in his life at 
that point. And this is a particular boy that went through the 
foster care system and went into a lot of homes, and so didn’t 
feel that he had anyone else to talk to other than myself. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I called all these youth that I worked 
with my kids. And so he said he wanted to talk to me and we 
worked out on what agencies were available for them and being 
young parents, and helped him through this experience. And we 
met just a few times and it was really wonderful that he came 
out to seek services through me and that was just through 
because of that relationship building that we had. And then once 
he had the baby, him and his partner came and had to show me 
the baby. So it’s wonderful. Those relationships that you build 
are incredibly important, and I do have to say that I deeply miss 
that work, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But the reason why I got into politics here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
was because of seeing some of the barriers that our clients have 
to face. And I wanted to work on a systematic level so that we 
could help reduce those barriers. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
since I’ve been elected, mental health, especially in Prince 



4272 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2018 

Albert area, has been greatly affected. In just two years, that 
work that I did in the high schools for mental health, those 
positions have been cut because the health region had to make 
some tough decisions with the lack of funding. So they pulled 
those workers out of the high schools and now have them 
working in the outpatients department. And like I said, it’s 
really hard to get those youth to the outpatient department. 
 
I’d like to also add that when those youth did face a crisis, they 
got comfortable with you and they’d come and see you. And so 
if they did present as being suicidal and we went with them to 
the hospital, we would be their advocate. And that is so very 
important to make sure that they get those services immediately 
and have that person with them. And now those services are 
being brought on the backs of teachers who aren’t trained to do 
this kind of work and don’t have the experience. But they do 
their best because they love those kids as well. 
 
Another thing that was cut since I’ve been in this role is the 
rural mental health and addiction workers. They used to have 
counsellors in all the rural schools. And again because of cuts to 
health that was suspended, which rural kids have even less 
opportunity for transportation or ability to seek services outside 
of their community. And so that was a big loss. 
 
Also mobile crisis in Prince Albert lost their daytime services. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they played the role of when 
someone was suicidal and they were deemed as a moderate risk, 
oftentimes they’d go back into their home. And so mobile crisis 
would go and check up on them and make sure that things were 
going all right. Well now mobile crisis is only able to do that in 
the evening, no longer able to do that during the daytime. So 
that’s a big loss. 
 
The Catholic school in Prince Albert had to cut their services 
with the Catholic Family Services. They provided a counsellor 
in multiple schools within the city, and because of the school 
having to make some tough decisions due to the cuts that they 
had from funding, they had to focus on their core services 
which would be educating students. And so they had to disband 
that service. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the Catholic Family Services 
was providing services within the Catholic schools in Prince 
Albert, they were providing services to as many as 200 
children. And once they moved those services, all those families 
were encouraged to go to their agency to receive services, but 
very few families were able to do that because one, it costs to 
receive services there, and two, the transportation issues and all 
of those unable to make the allowances. Parents sometimes 
can’t take the time off work in those situations. So we’ve seen a 
whole bunch of youth there that are falling through the cracks. 
 
And also this year I’ve been hearing from educators that they’ve 
been told that in their schools, the school social workers that do 
provide counselling in their schools are going to be cut to half 
the amount of time. And so in one particular rural school that I 
was talking to some people there, they had a counsellor that 
went in two days a week and now that’s going to be cut to two 
days every second week. And so they have a high-needs 
population; there’s always wait times to see that counsellor 
there. So again, more children falling through the cracks. 
 

So cutting these important services, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re 
seeing more and more crisis situations happening. And so we 
need to really be mindful of that. We have to make sure that we 
have services available for individuals when they need it 
immediately. 
 
And I want to also point out to the fact that we need to be 
mindful that individuals who may need mental health services 
aren’t necessarily coming to the service provider with those 
exact needs. They may be going to different service providers, 
say with regards to domestic violence, sexual assault. There 
might be mobile crisis attending a situation. And in the end, 
they realize that it is definitely mental health and addictions that 
is the root of the problem, you know, and needing to address 
that. And so, when we are making cuts to all these other 
agencies, we’re also really having a huge impact on the mental 
health services provided. And so we need to keep that in the 
back of our minds when we’re making these decisions, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to . . . I know my time . . . I could sit here and talk about 
mental health for hours, but I want to talk a little bit about the 
stigma of mental health. We’re doing a good job with working 
on that. It’s improving. And with that improvement, we’re 
seeing more people accessing services as well, which is 
wonderful, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s what we want, is we 
want people to come to us when they need that support. But I 
also notice when I see the support being provided in 
communities, oftentimes these agencies are in the basement or 
they’re in areas that are really hard to access. And I think we 
need to be mindful that these are services that are important. 
They’re health care services, and we should respect the 
individuals who are receiving those services and make sure that 
they’re in locations that are accessible. 
 
And another thing I really want to say is, if you want to know 
how to do better with mental health, go talk to those front-line 
workers because we know what needs to be done. And so come 
and talk to the front-line workers and they’ll give you lots of 
suggestions on what we can do. So thank you for letting me 
enter into this debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In the event 
that I run out of time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to state 
at the outset of my remarks, while we respect the motion put 
forward by the members opposite, it fails to recognize that our 
government is already taking action to increase supports for 
mental health and addiction services across the province, 
including in the North. Therefore I cannot support this motion. 
 
There is a well-known idiom that says before you judge a 
person, walk a mile in their shoes. This adage reminds us that 
we must understand before judging. It also reminds us to 
practise empathy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am the mother of three daughters. When our 
middle daughter Monique was born in 1987, a dark cloud 
descended almost immediately. She had jaundice and then colic 
but was otherwise a healthy baby. But I soon became very 
unhealthy. I developed severe symptoms of postpartum 



May 10, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4273 

depression, symptoms that presented in the hospital. Within 
weeks it was necessary to seek help from extended family in 
caring for our infant daughter while I sought medical assistance. 
 
I was fortunate to have a very good family physician, Dr. Hugh 
McKee in Saskatoon. He was ahead of his time with his 
knowledge in this area and was a godsend to me. Thankfully we 
worked together in the journey back to health and he made it 
clear that I had to do my share of the heavy lifting needed to 
regain my mental health. 
 
Fast forward three years, our third daughter Janelle was born in 
1990. Dr. McKee and I put a strategy in place in the event that I 
might be struck again with postpartum depression. This time it 
took three months to arrive, but arrive it did, and with force. 
The road to recovery was a bit easier as I now had the 
confidence that recovery fully was possible. I was fortunate to 
have a supportive and understanding husband to make that 
journey with me. Needless to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there 
was not going to be any attempt for a son after these two 
dreadful experiences with postpartum depression. 
 
Dr. McKee was chosen as the Saskatchewan Family Physician 
of the Year in 1992, in part, I believe, because of his knowledge 
and ability to help his patients suffering from mental illness. Dr. 
McKee passed away from pancreatic cancer just last September 
and I was heartbroken. I had to attend his funeral. I wanted his 
wife and son to know just how much he had helped me over the 
years. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I share this personal story for a couple of 
reasons. First, that it might be a beacon of hope for any mother 
who is listening today and is dealing with postpartum 
depression. There is full recovery. Another reason is that I had 
to accept my own responsibility and do the work to get better. 
Lastly I can relate to the people of this province who are 
suffering from mental illness as I have walked many miles in 
those shoes. 
 
I am so encouraged, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the maternal 
mental wellness program through HealthLine 811 has been 
fully implemented by this government. I am also encouraged 
that family physicians are now trained to deal with depression 
and postpartum depression. My new family doctor told me this 
is a significant part of his practice, treating depression and 
anxiety with his patients. 
 
But we haven’t stopped with this program, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Our government will also be implementing a targeted physician 
training program to improve the ability of physicians to assess 
and treat child and youth mental health conditions in 
Saskatchewan. There is $100,000 in the budget for this 
initiative. It will assist in reducing the wait times for child and 
youth psychiatry services. We recognize that there can be 
significant wait times to see psychiatrists, particularly child 
psychiatrists in Saskatoon, and this is just unacceptable. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Training family physicians in mental health is one way to 
improve these wait times. General practitioners now account for 
a large amount of mental health support and assessment in our 
communities but there are others: social workers; nurses 

working in service areas such as the HealthLine, the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, and primary health care clinics; 
and primary health care counsellors in a number of 
communities in the province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I read an article written by a farmer and 
the co-founder of Women in Ag, Kim Keller, in the fall 2017 
edition of Farmers’ Voice. In 2014 Kim received a message 
from a friend that one of her neighbouring farmers had 
committed suicide. Then a colleague contacted her in 2017 that 
another farmer was lost to suicide. Kim took action. She 
moderated a panel on mental health just a few weeks later at an 
agricultural producers of Saskatchewan meeting where a 
resolution was passed to adopt mental health in the ag industry 
as an issue to focus on. In Kim’s words, “Farm stress is real. 
Suicide is real.” I note that the Ministry of Agriculture supports 
the Farm Stress Line, providing farmers with resources to assist 
with farm stress related issues.  
 
We are spending $330 million on mental health and addiction 
supports in the Ministry of Health 2018-19 budget, an increase 
of 52 per cent since we formed government in 2007. Over 5 per 
cent of the ministry’s budget in this budget year, or $284 
million, was allocated directly to mental health. There was a 
total of 367 million in this year’s budget on mental health 
services. 
 
As these services are not just limited to the Ministry of Health, 
the Premier, the Deputy Premier, and the Minister of Health 
have committed to increasing the 5 per cent for mental health 
services to 7 per cent. On March 12th of this year, during 
question period, the Minister of Health responded to a question 
about committing funds to raise mental health and addictions 
funding to 7 per cent of our overall health care budget, and I 
quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier and the Premier both, in 
the leadership race, said it was their intention to get to 
7 per cent of the budget. That is our goal. We are going to 
get there as soon as finances allow, Mr. Speaker. 

 
This Sask Party government has committed $4.2 million to hire 
approximately 40 full-time positions in the communities of 
Saskatoon, Regina, Prince Albert, North Battleford, Moose Jaw, 
Swift Current, Yorkton, and Weyburn to develop community 
recovery teams who will provide support to individuals with 
complex and persistent mental illness. Four hundred thousand 
dollars is being invested to expand addiction services in Prince 
Albert and northern Saskatchewan, and to provide specialist 
consultation services to physicians and other service 
professionals. 
 
The new Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford is expected 
to open in the fall. It includes 188 long-term psychiatric 
rehabilitation beds and a 96-room secure unit for offenders 
living with mental health issues at a capital cost of $332 
million. The Ministry of Central Services’ budget has 
committed $1 million to cover the additional cost of increasing 
beds for this secure unit. 
 
The Ministry of Health has provided the former Keewatin and 
Mamawetan health regions with additional funds of $325,000 to 
support community suicide prevention initiatives, including 93 



4274 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2018 

staff who have been trained in mental health first aid. 
 
In our schools, there is over 30 million dedicated to mental 
health staff. This pays for 236 counsellors, 70 psychologists, 
and 78 social workers. 
 
In Saskatoon, a new mental health assessment unit opened just 
last month at the Royal University Hospital, located in the Dubé 
Centre. 
 
Four hundred and fifty take-home naloxone kits have been 
distributed and 1,200 individuals have received training on how 
to recognize and respond to overdoses. Suboxone has been 
added to the Saskatchewan formulary to treat opioid abuse. 
Naltrexone and acamprosate has been added to treat alcoholism. 
 
It is encouraging that communities in the North are taking 
initiative themselves. For example, the Lac La Ronge Indian 
Band is partnering with the Red Cross to develop its community 
safety plan and introduce suicide prevention training to schools 
in the area. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this motion speaks to increasing supports 
for mental health and addictions across this province. Here are 
the facts since this party formed government in 2007. Total 
funding for mental health and addictions has seen an increase of 
52 per cent. Mental health funding is increased by 69 per cent, 
while addictions funding is increased by nearly 49 per cent. 
This increase in investment supports 1,200 mental health 
positions and 300 addictions full-time positions. There has been 
an increase of licensed psychiatrists at 29 per cent. There has 
been an increase in psychologists by 27 per cent, an increase in 
clinical social workers by 48 per cent. And this government has 
reached a bilateral agreement with the federal government 
whereby Saskatchewan will receive 158.5 million in targeted 
funding for mental health services over the next 10 years. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is more work to do. We recognize 
this. But to suggest that this government has not increased 
supports for mental health and addictions in Saskatchewan is 
incorrect. While the motion raises an important . . . [inaudible] 
. . . I cannot . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting that 
this motion . . . What this motion says is: 
 

That this Assembly take action to further supports for 
mental health and addictions across the province, but 
particularly in northern Saskatchewan where the rates of 
suicide are alarming and services are extremely limited. 

 
I don’t know what part of that motion isn’t satisfactory to those 
folks on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think it’s 
the place of the government, when children and youth are 
dying, to pat themselves on the back. Yes, they have made 
some investments in mental health, and as well they should, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But you know what? The last member, she liked to use the 
language, “the facts,” Mr. Speaker. The facts are that we as a 

province spend far less on mental health than any other 
province across the country, Mr. Speaker. We are at 5 per cent 
of our provincial health budget being spent on mental health. 
The average in Canada is about 7 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and 
that 7 per cent actually is not even where the goal should be. 
I’m going to take you to an article written by Keith Doucette in 
The Canadian Press, where the number says here . . . Okay, so 
a quote here: 
 

“Access to care is abysmal in most places throughout the 
country and of course that’s linked . . . not only, but very 
much to funding,” said Louise Bradley, executive director 
of the Mental Health Commission of Canada . . . 

 
That was from August 28, 2016. 
 
So the reality is, Mr. Speaker, other governments in Canada and 
the Canadian Mental Health Association is encouraging 
spending to 9 per cent, and 9 per cent is recognized to not even 
be enough, Mr. Speaker. Other jurisdictions that are doing well 
spend 10 to 14 per cent of their health budget on mental health, 
Mr. Speaker. This government’s daydreaming or blue-skying is 
to get to 7 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and they haven’t provided a 
plan. I look forward to our continued time in estimates. They’ve 
said they’d like to get to 7 per cent but they haven’t moved off 
of 5 per cent, Mr. Speaker, despite having dedicated funds from 
this provincial government, or from the federal government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have to point to my colleague from Cumberland’s comments 
where he says, it is no comfort for families when they hear the 
comment, there’s more work to do, which I think all three folks 
and I think the ministers often have to say that there is more 
work to do. You’re darn right there’s more work to do, Mr. 
Speaker, and it is no comfort to families. 
 
I am one of those families who has a vacant spot around the 
table, Mr. Speaker, because of a lack of support in mental 
health, and I happen to come from a privileged family. I’m a 
MLA and my brother and his wife are strong advocates. They 
know the system. They are people who know how to ask 
questions. And you know what? They couldn’t get for their son 
what he needed, so we have a vacant spot around our family 
table at every function because of a lack of mental health. So I 
can relate to my colleague from Cumberland who talks about 
having to go to funeral after funeral after funeral. 
 
This government’s record, Mr. Speaker, actions speak louder 
than words. There’s a two-year wait-list for psychiatry, but 
psychiatry is only a small part of the puzzle, Mr. Speaker. 
Two-year wait to see a psychiatrist, but the fact of the matter is 
even . . . And I look forward to getting the numbers in 
committee next week — I asked this yesterday — but to get 
help for children and youth who have mild to moderate mental 
health challenges, Mr. Speaker. So this is about nipping the 
problem in the bud before you need a psychiatrist. 
 
I’ve been told, and I look forward to that confirmation next 
week, that there are currently 300 children waiting for help in 
that mild-to-moderate area, Mr. Speaker. To get that help, Mr. 
Speaker, that would be proactive. 
 
We have a government who . . . Actually one of the members 



May 10, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4275 

talked about that mental health assessment unit at Royal 
University Hospital, which is a great facility. And I would 
argue we could still continue to do things a lot differently, Mr. 
Speaker, but it’s a small part of that. This government didn’t put 
additional funds in it. There was a request from the then 
Saskatoon Health Region for $1.2 million to support that mental 
health assessment unit. You know that this government did not 
provide additional resources. That region had to pull money 
from other parts of mental health and addictions to get that 
facility open, Mr. Speaker. So they can talk about this mental 
health assessment unit which will make visiting the Royal 
University Hospital much easier, Mr. Speaker, but I don’t think 
that they should be taking a heck of a lot of credit for getting 
those doors open. And they need to recognize that when you 
pull resources from somewhere else, it is a problem. 
 
You look at the Dubé Centre, Mr. Speaker. Just a couple days 
ago — and this is not unusual — they are always running over 
capacity in there. I believe it’s 54 adult mental health beds, and 
they were at 117 per cent capacity just a few days ago. That’s a 
number that is available every day. I understand they’re over 
capacity almost every single day, Mr. Speaker. And as a result, 
people who have mental health challenges who are trying to get 
well don’t have the access to the services they need. 
 
We can talk about, again, actions speaking louder than words, 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about a program that was put in 
place to support folks in rural and remote areas. There was a 
program that we just heard last week from the Schizophrenia 
Society of Saskatchewan, their partnerships program. They had 
a $32,000 program of relatively . . . $32,000 in the scheme of a 
provincial budget, Mr. Speaker, isn’t a lot of money. This is a 
program that allowed people and supported people who are 
living with mental health challenges, the opportunity to travel 
into rural and remote areas and destigmatize and help provide 
presentations to community members, so a community member 
could see themselves perhaps reflected in that individual and 
see that a mental health diagnosis doesn’t have to be a death 
sentence, Mr. Speaker, nor should it be. 
 
But this government . . . $32,000 and they didn’t see fit to 
provide money for that in this budget, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
government when it comes to stigma around mental health . . . 
So we can talk about reducing stigma, but this is a government 
who is building a children’s hospital and has chosen not to put 
children with mental health issues in the children’s hospital. 
 
There are 10 beds at the Dubé Centre which serve the purpose 
of supporting children with mental health needs. But I can tell 
you that talking to child psychiatrists in Saskatoon, it’s 
heartbreaking for them to have to tell their patients. 
 
It’s a bit of a gong show at the RUH [Royal University 
Hospital] right now on that site because of the building of the 
children’s hospital. Parking is difficult. So I’ve been told by 
psychiatrists, you have a family come in, a youth’s family come 
in, and they are telling . . . they’re complaining about the 
parking. But then they say, but you know it’s really great, we’ll 
have this wonderful children’s hospital. And the psychiatrist has 
to say, hey, you know what, your kids aren’t going to be served 
at the new children’s hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The whole point about a children’s hospital is the opportunity to 

provide integrated services and to have everybody benefit from 
that. So I think this government . . . This wasn’t an oversight 
either, Mr. Speaker. This is a government . . . I raised it a few 
years ago. I know other people have raised it. Before the 
children’s hospital started construction, this wasn’t an 
oversight, this was a decision not to put children and youth with 
mental health issues in to the new children’s hospital, Mr. 
Speaker, which I think is an absolute, absolute shame. 
 
This is a government who, when it comes to waiting, if you 
happen to detox from a substance that you may be addicted to, 
the wait to get into actual treatment . . . So you detox and you 
are waiting about eight weeks. I believe the wait to get in for 
men in Saskatoon is eight weeks. So you tell me how that 
person gets from the point of detox to treatments without 
relapsing again, Mr. Speaker. So again, actions speak louder 
than words. 
 
[11:45] 
 
This is a government who is moving . . . The Paul Dojack 
Youth Centre, there was a six-bed facility in that youth centre 
— and I understand it was a decision by Justice — but those six 
beds are moving to the Regina General Hospital which is a 
positive thing. It was a health facility, it was a . . . But you 
know what? They were told in February that these kids have to 
be moved and there were no resources. Yes, when the new 
facility opens it’ll be great but there was zero support. Those six 
beds, those kids have to be transferred to other facilities. There 
was zero support to help with the transfer, Mr. Speaker, in the 
time that there is the renovation taking place. So again I would 
argue that actions speak louder than words. And this 
government can say all it wants when it comes to supporting 
mental health, but they have not put their money where their 
mouth is, Mr. Speaker, and that is the fact. 
 
I will be supporting my colleague’s motion as I think that it is 
not difficult to support, recognizing that we have a crisis in 
youth suicides in the North, and we should be putting those 
supports in place. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
bit of an awkward motion to get involved with because the 
suggestions of the motion are indeed accurate and can be taken 
in a good context. I agree with the concept; however the motion 
fails in a way that it does not recognize the significant 
advancements that have been put in place by the Saskatchewan 
Party government. A test to this whole fact is the fact that we 
are serious about health issues in this province and the way 
they’re managed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when we look at the overall health budget, of how it’s 
increased over the years, we’ve got over 900 more doctors 
practising in the province than we did in 2007, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s over 3,000 nurses of every designation practising in the 
province since 2007. We have new hospitals and we’re blessed 
with a new hospital in Moose Jaw as well as the new hospital 
that is being erected in North Battleford, and the children’s 
hospital which is much needed in this province. 
 



4276 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2018 

So our commitment to health is very important and we’re very 
serious about looking after it. The fact is significant that more 
has to be done, but we are progressing and we are investing 
very strategically in a lot of the aspects of health. This 
government has invested substantially more in health care, in 
medical staff, in hospitals, in care homes, in special services 
including mental health counselling, and in treatments, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You know, I made the comment some time ago to one of my 
constituents that there will never be enough money for health, 
and I believe that. Well he reiterated by saying, well there is, 
but it has to be managed well. You know, I guess there’s a 
medium there somewhere that there always needs to be more 
money. There’s always more that we can do, but it has to be 
managed well. And I think this budget serves the health needs 
as best we can and we’re always looking for more to do, and 
better ways and setting priorities. 
 
And we recognize the priorities that are required, and mental 
health, by this government, is a priority. We recognize mental 
health and addictions is an important issue, Mr. Speaker. Just in 
reading the material getting ready for this debate, I was 
impressed with the amount of initiative and the programs that 
have been put in place by our government, particularly in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Our Saskatchewan Party government is to be commended for 
the increase in the funding that they have done in professional 
assistance and support since taking over government in 2007. 
And that’s not a boasting statement, Mr. Speaker. There are 
extreme demands and always more that is required. However, 
we have come a long way, even knowing that more has to be 
done. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party government is taking significant steps 
toward improving services for mental health and addiction, and 
will continue to keep these services a high priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to mental health, there have been 
great gains. However there’s still much more to learn and to 
understand. I understand a little bit more about depression 
because there is some in my family. I recall a mother phoning 
me, or talking to me, and telling me about her adult daughter 
who called home one day about 4:30 and said, mom, I can’t get 
off the couch; I know my husband’s going to be home shortly 
and the dinner dishes are still on the table, but I can’t get off the 
couch. Now what do you say to somebody like that? Do you tell 
them to take another pill? That doesn’t do any good if they 
can’t get off the couch. 
 
I know everyone in this room will find it hard to understand 
about depression. I know it. I was like that too. But depression 
is a cruel illness, and there’s no logic explanation that can be 
made. 
 
Depression seems to be more common in our society than it 
used to. Perhaps it’s because, in years past, depression was not 
diagnosed as depression. But we know it has been a factor in 
humankind since probably the beginning. 
 
You know, I think of Walter Scott. The first premier of the 
province suffered severe bouts of depression during his tenure 

as premier, yet he achieved tremendous goals in planning and 
creating and building our province. Today we understand more 
about depression and realize more has to be done. There is still 
much more to do. And we don’t recognize depression for all it 
is, but there still needs to be done. When you think of taking 
just another pill, if you can’t get off the couch and take it, it 
really does you no good. So there’s a lot to be done. 
 
And mental health goes far beyond depression. It may involve 
addictions, trauma, family violence, loss of employment. These 
need to be supported, and our government is committed to 
increasing mental health supports across the province, including 
the North. 
 
In the 2018 budget, our government is investing $11.4 million 
in new, targeted mental health initiatives, targeted physician 
training programs, continued expanding suicide prevention 
efforts, enhancing community access to mental health and 
addiction services. We’re hiring 40 more full-time employees 
for development of multidisciplinary community resource 
recovery teams in eight communities to provide support to 
individuals with complex and persistent mental health issues. 
 
Mental health and addiction is not limited to the Ministry of 
Health. And the member opposite was talking about 
percentages, but there are other avenues, other ministries that 
are involved. The Ministry of Justice provides a free 
one-on-one counselling service for adults and youth that have 
experienced family violence. There’s group counselling, 
therapy for children exposed to domestic violence. 
 
The Minister of Corrections and Policing has mental health 
court operated in partnership with the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General, crime reduction strategies targeted at 
high-risk offenders, and mental health services in youth custody 
for youth in Kilburn Hall. 
 
The Minister of Social Services contributes to it in funding 
provided for one and a half mental health coordinators 
positioned in community-based organizations used to determine 
the level of support required for community living services 
delivered to clients with disability and mental health issues. 
 
The Minister of Education is involved with mental health for 
anti-bullying initiatives and a K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] 
mental health resource for counsellors, psychologists, and social 
workers. Even the Minister of Agriculture has the Farm Stress 
Line, so there’s a lot to be involved in from across government 
to assist in mental health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, mental health is a serious issue. It is a health 
priority that our government takes seriously and crosses many 
of its ministries. To suggest that action be taken is a lack of 
understanding on the mover of this particular motion, Mr. 
Speaker. And while the motion raises an important issue, and 
one our government takes very seriously, I cannot support the 
motion put forward by the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has been consistent in our support 
for mental health and mental health issues, and will continue to 
do so. We’ve invested a large amount of money, increasing to 
do so as we move forward to look after the people that require 
the help they need in these kinds of situations. Mr. Speaker, I 



May 10, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4277 

won’t be supporting the motion as presented opposite. Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Each year since we had 
the honour of becoming government, record funding numbers 
have been invested into our health care systems. This has 
resulted in more and more caseworkers being available to 
support people from all over Saskatchewan. Since 2007, mental 
health funding has increased by 69 per cent while addictions 
funding is up by forty-eight and a half per cent. My question is 
for the member from P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote. Since 
2007, can you agree that adding 1,200 mental health care 
full-time employee positions, 360 addiction treatment beds, as 
well as 1,224 community residential beds throughout the 
province has been beneficial in supporting people right across 
our province? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — I don’t think the member across was 
listening to my comments when I was talking about how there 
was cuts to education, cuts to social services, cuts to health, and 
there’s been cuts to programs everywhere. Take a look at the 
wait times for those beds you talk about. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — The rate of suicide in our province is six 
times higher for First Nation boys than non-First Nation boys 
and 26 times higher for First Nation girls than non-First Nation 
girls. My question is to the member from Regina Rochdale. 
How can you admit that there is not a suicide crisis in the 
North? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Well thank you very much, but the statement of 
my colleague from across the floor is incorrect. I have never, 
ever stated that in fact there isn’t a suicide crisis in the North. 
And so for him to make that statement I find quite offensive, to 
be honest. 
 
And I have a personal commitment to the North, and it’s not 
geographically, just because I live in the city of Regina. I have 
family that lives in the North. We spend time in the North. And 
so for them to kind of indicate that in fact I don’t care as an 
elected representative when I was elected by the people of 
Regina, I was elected to represent the people of Saskatchewan 
also. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each and every one of us who come here, come 
here to hope to do the best they can for the people of 
Saskatchewan, not just the people of Regina. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 

Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the former Keewatin 
Yatthé Health Region, since 2007 we’ve added twenty-one and 
a half full-time positions, an increase of 24 per cent. In the 
former Mamawetan Churchill River Health Region, we’ve 
added 32.8 full-time positions, an increase of 24 per cent. 
Although there is much more work to do, this government has 
committed funding mental health services in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this question is for the member from Cumberland. 
Why do your members attack this government for not 
supporting the North when support is substantially higher than 
it was under the NDP government? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me be very 
clear. You can say all you want about patting yourselves on the 
back about there’s more work to be done, and you can say that. 
But to the families in northern Saskatchewan that are burying 
and having to say farewell to their loved ones, it’s unbelievable 
that your government hasn’t done more. And your government 
needs to do more to help northern Saskatchewan. It is in a crisis 
and you need to respond that way. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — To the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood: your government loves to grandstand and 
pick fights with Ottawa but when it comes to stepping up and 
matching federal government mental health funding, 
Saskatchewan is coming up short. Why has your government 
failed to match the federal funding for mental health? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, and I thank the member opposite 
for the question. We have talked about this in question period 
and I know our Minister of Health has answered this question 
repeatedly, but I’d like to just point out, as I did in my speech, 
that we are spending 330 million within the Ministry of Health 
on mental health and addiction support. That’s an increase of 52 
per cent since 2007. And currently our health budget has 
dedicated 5 per cent to mental health services, but the Premier, 
the deputy premier, and the Minister of Health have all 
committed to increasing this to 7 per cent. We recognize that 
more needs to be done and we are committed to that. Thank 
you. 
 
[12:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Since 
2007 our government has been working hard to provide 
increased mental health services to the people in northern 
Saskatchewan. In this time we have increased mental health and 
addiction funding by 52 per cent and mental health FTEs 
[full-time equivalent] by 18 per cent. My question is for the 
member from Cumberland: what would you do to attract mental 



4278 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2018 

health and addiction professionals to the northern communities 
in Saskatchewan? Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me be very 
clear. Here’s a good suggestion: La Ronge Indian Band — and 
this is more work for all members on that side; you can do a 
lobby for it — help La Ronge Indian Band with their wellness 
centre. They want to partner with the government. Do that, and 
that’s how we’ll help. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Leaders in the Lac La Ronge Indian Band 
have proposed a wellness centre to provide mental health and 
addictions services in the North. Does the member from Regina 
Rochdale agree with me? Does she think the province should 
support this wellness centre? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and thank the 
members opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, we have made 
a financial commitment to the North in regards to mental health 
and suicides. You know, this is not just specific to one area, but 
in fact we do realize that mental health issues are rising across 
the whole province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we formed government we made a 
commitment to look at mental health but also that we are not 
. . . that we as individuals or people we know who have issues 
with mental health, we don’t let them suffer in silence, Mr. 
Speaker. We encourage them to speak up. So, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s why we increased funding by 52 per cent. Mr. Speaker, 
when we formed government we made a commitment and we 
kept that commitment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our 
government is dedicated to addressing the challenge of mental 
health and addictions in northern communities, as evidenced in 
our current budget in which the Ministry of Health is dedicating 
a record 330 million to mental health and addictions supports. 
We are working hard to better service and support the people in 
the North while also ensuring we are on track to balance a 
budget next year. My question is for the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. If you were to increase spending on these 
services, would you cut programs or raise taxes to pay for it? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — I would like that member to go and tell the 
families that lost their loved ones that they are going to continue 
to lose more loved ones because they can’t find the money to 
help with the suicide rates that are up in the North. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member 
from Moose Jaw North: does he think that it’s fair that kids 
with mental health challenges are the only ones who won’t be 
able to heal in the children’s hospital? Won’t this further 
stigmatize mental health? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, you know, I said and several 
of my colleagues on this side have said that the seriousness of 
mental health is taken very seriously on this side, and we have 
increased the amount of funding we’ve done for it. I do want to 
say that when I first got into the legislature in 2007, the 
member, the critic for Health on that side was the former Health 
minister and he started bashing us for not building a hospital in 
North Battleford. And that was his home constituency and he 
was the Health minister, and yet for years they did nothing. 
 
And then when they have the opportunity to bash us on it, then 
that’s what they do but they wouldn’t do anything while they 
were there. And yet still this government took it upon 
themselves to build a new hospital in North Battleford to look 
after mental health issues for the province of Saskatchewan. I 
want to put that on the record. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 
is making every effort to ensure that children in the province 
have access to mental health services. For the four months of 
2017, for the last four months of 2017 across the province, 100 
per cent of children and youth with very severe mental health 
problems were seen within 24 hours. Ninety-nine per cent of 
children and youth with severe problems were seen within five 
working days. One hundred per cent of children and youth with 
moderate problems were seen within 20 working days. 
Ninety-nine per cent of children and youth with mild problems 
were seen within 30 working days. We are also building a 
children’s hospital. And yes, there is much more work to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this question is to the member from Cumberland: 
instead of just criticizing the government . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 
expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 2 — Opposition’s Fiscal Plan 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Mr. Nerlien.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Before I recognize the member who’s 



May 10, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4279 

on his feet, it is my duty, pursuant to rule 27, to advise the 
Assembly that this item of business has been previously 
adjourned three times and cannot further be adjourned. At the 
conclusion of debate or at the normal time of adjournment, 
whichever is reached first, every question necessary to dispose 
of this motion shall be put. 
 
I recognize the member from Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. And just to 
remind everybody what the actual motion is, proposed by my 
good friend from Kelvington-Wadena, his motion is: 
 

That this Assembly rejects the NDP plan to increase 
spending by over $2.5 billion, as it would leave 
Saskatchewan with an extreme deficit and increase the debt 
of future generations. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as everybody knows, I can’t speak near as 
eloquently as my friend from Kelvington-Wadena. And I’m 
actually kind of a very quiet-spoken person, and don’t get going 
too hard, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, I can honestly say that 
the opposition, when they came up with this whole grand 
scheme of things in their plan, $2.5 billion, they never costed it 
out, Mr. Speaker. They just went and they said, this is what 
we’re going to do; this is what we’re going to do; this is what 
we’re going to do. And some of them actually, I have to say, 
were some pretty good ideas. 
 
But with all good ideas there comes a cost, Mr. Speaker. So as 
usual, as usual the opposition left it up to us to do the hard work 
and figure out what the actual costing was — $2.5 billion a 
year, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t know how they plan on paying 
for it. They didn’t come up with that part. Somewhere along the 
line you’re going to have to pay for it. 
 
Now maybe they want to increase the carbon tax. Maybe they 
want to go to $200 a tonne. I don’t know. Maybe they want to 
go along with their federal cousins and do something like that. 
You know, they’ve got all these ideas that they come up with 
that nobody can actually realize and there’s no rationale to it. 
But we all know that some of them on the other side actually 
support the Leap Manifesto, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, the other way they could do it is they can raise 
taxes on the corporations. They can raise taxes on individuals. 
They can chase people out of the province, which they did for a 
number of years, Mr. Speaker. They chased out corporations. 
They chased out people, chased out our kids. 
 
Anyways, Mr. Speaker, as I continue on here, there is one thing 
I want to bring up that’s actually a little bit . . . It’s not quite on 
this motion but it’s close. And I’d be remiss if I didn’t mention 
that the Leader of the Opposition actually was up in the great 
constituency of Carrot River here just a matter of a couple of 
weeks ago. He was at a Nipawin fundraiser. I don’t know if 
there were more than 10 people there but anyway. But his main 
focus at the meeting was on physician shortage, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I honestly, I have to chuckle at that, how he could 
come up with something like that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was first elected in 2007, there was a grand 
total of four physicians in Nipawin. I was fielding three calls a 

day for people looking for family physicians, and they didn’t 
have them. Now, Mr. Speaker, through the work, the good, hard 
work of the government on this side of the House, there are 12 
physicians in Nipawin, Mr. Speaker. What a difference, what a 
difference from when that government was in power. 
 
You know, we have 900 more doctors in the province now. We 
have — what is it? — 3,700 more nurses in the province right 
now. And they have the audacity to come up there and sit there 
and say, well we want to do more for rural Saskatchewan. Well 
here’s the other catch, Mr. Speaker. Even if they would have 
had more doctors, at the rate they were going of closing down 
hospitals, they wouldn’t have had a hospital to put a doctor in, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to go back to some of the things that they brought 
up, some of these fantastic ideas that they came up with to 
spend this $2.5 million. What they wanted to do, since they’re 
all a bunch of agriculture gurus over there, Mr. Speaker, they 
wanted the farmers to go organic. And this was a great idea. 
You know, they’re going to pay farmers, pay farmers $18 
million — we costed it out — for farmers to go organic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I come from a farm background. I have farm land. 
I have farm land that hasn’t been summerfallowed for 35 years. 
Direct-till farming was actually originated in northeastern 
Saskatchewan. The way we can improve our land, improve our 
crops is to our good farmers of Saskatchewan who keep on 
coming up with innovative things to do on their farms, by 
applying good crop care products to the fields, and increasing 
their yields so we’re not letting people in the world go out and 
starve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s maybe what their other plan is. And maybe 
they’ve got an ulterior motive to this. We all know, we all know 
that if you’re going go organic farming, the one way you can 
eradicate weeds is you have to go out and you have to go back 
to cultivation. And, Mr. Speaker, when you’re going back and 
you’re running your tractors back and forth across the fields all 
the time to do that, guess what? You’re using a lot more fuel. 
You’re going to have to go out there. You’re going to have to 
summerfallow. You’re using a lot more fuel. Good idea on 
them. What they’re going to do then is when they put the 
carbon tax on there, guess what? The fuel prices for the farmers 
just went through the roof. And that maybe, maybe is what their 
whole scheme of things is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another good one they came up . . . Speaking of farms, another 
one they came up was to repeal Bill 63 and let the school boards 
go out there and set the mill rates again. So the farmers can go 
back, the good farmers in our area, can go back to paying a 
disproportionate share of the education taxes. Mr. Speaker, 
when they talk about rural Saskatchewan, they are so out of 
touch with rural Saskatchewan it’s actually pathetic. 
 
To just think, Mr. Speaker, we also have a forestry industry 
within northern Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, here comes the 
carbon tax on the forest end of it. They want us to . . . Because 
obviously in the forest industry we use lots of fuel. There’s lots 
of energy being used. Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s put a carbon tax 
on forestry. Maybe that’s one of the ways they’re going to come 
up again with their $2.5 billion. 
 



4280 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2018 

Mr. Speaker, our forest industry is very efficient and very good 
at what they do. They want to cut down on the use of energy as 
much as what they can, because obviously it affects their 
bottom line. It’s the same as farmers. But, Mr. Speaker, we 
don’t want to be providing, providing the NDP with that kind of 
money. Of course it goes back to their corporate taxes. If the 
forestry company makes money, oh well, they want to raise the 
tax sum. 
 
We remember a few years ago when the NDP was back in 
power, how many of the lumber mills shut down within this 
province. Mr. Speaker, the lumber mills are doing quite well 
now under this government. And it wasn’t just the government 
that made things all help on that. You know, the price of lumber 
was really down at that time too. But I can still remember when, 
on the eve of the 2000 election, 2007 election, when the NDP 
government went out and tried to give $100 million to Domtar 
to try and keep the plant going in Prince Albert, of the people’s 
money. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Also going back and looking through the various different 
things that they had within their ideas on where their $2.5 
billion was going to be spent, I had to take a look at Parks, 
Culture and Sport: $16,880,000 on arts, on arts alone, Mr. 
Speaker. Like I mean, I have to admit, you know, we could use 
some arts, but $16,880,000 just on art alone. Just on the arts. 
Mr. Speaker, this is hard to believe. I don’t know how they 
could even come up with things like that. You know, they had 
nothing for parks. They had nothing for sport. This was under 
Parks, Culture and Sport. Nothing for parks. Of course, we all 
have our regional parks out there in rural Saskatchewan. They 
had nothing for them. Of course, they starved them back when 
they were in government. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, they also had some other really good things 
coming along here. They want to commission to study on 
producing generic drugs under a new Crown, SaskPharm. Well 
this is a great one, Mr. Speaker. The NDP was never really 
known to be all that good at running a business, and they want 
us to set up a drug company here where we can actually go out 
and manufacture drugs within the province and, I guess, hand 
them out. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Only government can do it. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Only government, you’re right. Only 
government can do something like this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to remind him back, well in the forerunners, back 
in the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] days, 
remember they tried to run a shoe factory and they tried to run a 
box factory. It didn’t really work out all that well for them. 
They tried to run the fish factory. That didn’t work out all that 
well for them either. 
 
Well then they decided to change the CCF over to the NDP 
because CCF wasn’t working quite that well. So they continued 
on with their great ways. They, you know, they tried to get into 
bingo, Mr. Speaker, where they lost $8 million. I don’t know 
why the government wanted to get into bingo, but they did. And 
they decided to get into pig barns, where they lost $26 million, 

Mr. Speaker. I don’t know why they wanted to do that. And of 
course we had the great NDP potato factory called SPUDCO 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company] that 
managed to lose something like $35 million. 
 
So the whole thing goes back. Now they want to go in and start 
SaskPharm, a company that’s going to go out there and produce 
generic drugs. Mr. Speaker, when you go through this whole 
listing, actually if I was them, I would be embarrassed. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there’s another one that they put back in 
there. They want to go back and restart the STC [Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company] now, Mr. Speaker, even though the 
STC didn’t make a dime since 1978. And the NDP diehards 
always say Tommy started it, not to make money but to provide 
a service. And it did make money until 1978, which leads to the 
question, Mr. Speaker, why wasn’t the service given a cost? 
 
But that’s the past and this is now, Mr. Speaker. The new 
Leader of the Opposition estimated it would cost $10 million to 
restart STC. But, Mr. Speaker, I think that they didn’t really 
cost that out that well again. Mr. Speaker, we went back and 
started looking at what the cost would be on this, and the cost 
would be at least $50 million. Then, since the fact that it was 
losing money every year, it would lose $85 million over the 
next five years. Where is the money going to come from, Mr. 
Speaker? Mr. Speaker, they come up with all these different 
ideas. 
 
Another one they’ve got, the other one they’ve got is the 
Opposition Leader wants to see a living wage, Mr. Speaker. 
This is really great that they want to see a living wage and 
everybody get paid for not working. Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s 
face it. Humans are human. You start paying them a wage for 
not working, guess what they’re not going to do? They’re not 
going to work. And eventually the people who are working hard 
and who are paying the taxes — which would be exorbitant 
under the NDP because they never believed in lowering income 
taxes at all — when it got down to that point, Mr. Speaker, 
you’d have a whole bunch of people that just weren’t working 
because they wanted the government to pay for it. 
 
Now with all these various things that the NDP opposition 
wanted to do, I don’t know where they’re going to come up 
with that money to pay for it. Maybe that carbon tax is going to 
go to $400 a tonne, you know. That way we can pay for people 
who aren’t working. You know, Finland just had a great 
experiment with this living wage. They tried it for two years 
and then they said, hey this isn’t working because, well, the 
people aren’t working. Go figure. 
 
Anyway, going back to what it actually would cost — now this 
is for Canada, mind you; this isn’t for just Saskatchewan, this is 
for Canada — it would cost approximately $15 billion a year 
out of the government coffers to help pay for this. Well where is 
this money going to come from? You’ve already chased the 
corporations out because you increased the taxes on them. You 
already chased out the people who were higher wage earners: 
the professionals, the entrepreneurs. You’ve chased them out. 
Somewhere along the line, you’re going to have to find a way to 
get that money. Well maybe raise that carbon tax up to $600 a 
tonne instead. 
 



May 10, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4281 

Then, Mr. Speaker, you know, they wanted to see a minimum 
of a $15 wage. Now here’s the catch. Most of the gurus on that 
side of the House never actually figured out or have never, ever 
written out a T4 for anybody. All they’ve ever done is received 
them. You have to realize that, as an entrepreneur, we have to 
. . . It’s not just a matter of that $15 an hour. You have to 
remember that in that, you have to have your unemployment 
insurance taken off, Mr. Speaker. You have to have your 
workmen’s compensation taken off. You have to have your 
Canada Pension taken off. And I know that those people on the 
opposition over on that side of the House, they’ve never ever 
figured that one out. 

So what it does then, it just makes it so the employers, if there’s 
any left after what they want to do, the employers would have 
to pay out way more than $15 an hour in this money, of course. 

You know and we know that the NDP, especially their federal 
cousins and their cousins out in BC [British Columbia], don’t 
want any pipelines either. So consequently some of the 
resources that we have, we can’t ship. Then some of the other 
resources that we have, called potash and grain, has to go out by 
rail pulled behind an engine that is using diesel fuel. So there 
we go. There goes that carbon tax again. That carbon tax just 
keeps on coming back all the time. Okay, let’s raise it up to 
$800 a tonne. 

Mr. Speaker, I have to say that there’s got to be some members 
on that side really, really have to question what their leader is 
coming forward. There’s got to be some common sense in 
amongst the members on the other side. And they’ve got to sit 
back and they’ve got to take a look at all of these promises that 
they made, Mr. Speaker. And how they’re going to do it, I have 
no idea because all of their plan, their whole plan, is to raise 
taxes, raise taxes, raise taxes. And sooner or later, Mr. Speaker, 
that comes to an end. And you know what? When that comes to 
an end, this province may as well shut down because it pretty 
well did when that party was in power for 16 years. Mr. 
Speaker . . . 

An Hon. Member: — Sixteen long years. 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Very long years. Mr. Speaker, our budget is 
on track. Our budget is based on reality. There are some things 
we want to do, we wish we could do, and we unfortunately 
can’t at the present time. But we are on track to get back into 
balance without throwing a great big carbon tax on all the 
people of Saskatchewan, and keeping our corporations in 
Saskatchewan and our people in Saskatchewan alive, healthy, 
and prosperous. With that, Mr. Speaker, I’m sitting down. 

The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

The Deputy Speaker: — The item before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the member from Kelvington-Wadena: 

That this Assembly rejects the NDP’s plan to increase 
spending by over $2.5 billion, as it would leave 
Saskatchewan with an extreme deficit and increase the 
debt of future generations. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

The Deputy Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion please 
say aye. 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

The Deputy Speaker: — Those opposed please say no. 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

The Deputy Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Guess 
we’re calling in the members. 

[The division bells rang from 12:27 until 12:29.] 

The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is: 

That this Assembly rejects the NDP’s plan to increase 
spending by over $2.5 billion, as it would leave 
Saskatchewan with an extreme deficit and increase the 
debt of future generations. 

All those in favour of the motion, please rise. 

[Yeas — 45] 

Moe Beaudry-Mellor Merriman 
Stewart Reiter Wyant 
Morgan Harpauer Duncan 
Marit Hargrave D’Autremont 
Cox Heppner Makowsky 
Tell Eyre Brkich 
Harrison Ottenbreit Cheveldayoff 
Weekes Kirsch Bradshaw 
Fiaz Ross Carr 
Lawrence Young Wilson 
McMorris Michelson Bonk 
Doke Steinley Hindley 
Buckingham Lambert Dennis 
Nerlien Steele Tochor 
Goudy Olauson Francis 

The Deputy Speaker: — All those opposed to the motion 
please rise. 

[Nays — 2] 

Sproule McCall 

Clerk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 
45; those opposed, 2. 

The Deputy Speaker: — The motion is carried. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 

Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 



4282 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2018 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:32.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4259 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4259 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4259 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4259 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4259 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4267 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4259 
  Francis ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4259 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4260 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4260 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4260 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Nurses Make a Difference 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4260 
 Non-Profit Focuses on Mental Health in the Ag Industry 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4261 
 Mental Health and Addiction Services Fun Run 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4261 
 Raising Awareness About Ovarian Cancer 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4261 
 Student Business Club Wins Award 
  Hindley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4261 
 Students Excel in Space Projects 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4262 
 Celebrating Mother’s Day 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4262 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Funding for Education Capital Costs 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4262 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4262 
 Funding for Teacher Salaries 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4263 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4263 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4263 
 Provincial Sales Tax on Used Vehicles 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4263 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4264 
 Funding for Wildfire Management 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4264 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4264 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4264 
 Global Transportation Hub and Freedom of Information Law 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4265 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4265 
 Support for Post-Secondary Institutions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4265 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4266 
 Crown Land Incentive 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4266 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4266 
 Provincial Budget and Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4267 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4267 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Supports for Mental Health and Addictions 
  Vermette ........................................................................................................................................................................ 4267, 4277 
  Ross ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4270, 4277 
  Rancourt ........................................................................................................................................................................ 4271, 4277 
  Lambert ......................................................................................................................................................................... 4272, 4277 



 

  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 4274, 4278 
  Michelson ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4275, 4278 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4277 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4277 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4277 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4278 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4278 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 2 — Opposition’s Fiscal Plan 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4279 
 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 4281 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


