


















































May 30, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 67A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 30, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4433 
 May 30, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I’ve got some introductions first. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and to welcome to Saskatchewan 
and to our Legislative Building, a delegation of interns from the 
Ontario Legislature Internship Programme who are seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. 
 
They are in Regina today to take part in the Canadian political 
science conference being held at the University of Regina and 
have taken time out to visit us today. They are — just give us a 
wave when I say your name — Daryl Gonsalves, Kassandra 
Loewen, Josef Méthot, Ana Qarri, and Harmeet Sandhu. Also 
attending with the interns is Dr. Peter Constantinou, the 
academic director of the program. 
 
We had an opportunity to visit with them this afternoon, had 
some lunch. A great, great group here. Everybody is sharp. I ask 
all members to welcome our guests to Saskatchewan and to this 
legislature. 
 
I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Goudy: — I ask leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Melfort has asked for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Goudy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce the good-looking crew of students and 
their teachers to their legislature, in the west gallery. We have 
16 grade 5 and 6 students from Englefeld School and their 
teacher, Jolene Gullacher, and Loraine Kowalskiand their 
parent chaperones: Albine Ostrovsky, Rene Osborne, and Lance 
Stockbrugger. So we appreciate them being here today. 
 
Also, from St. Brieux we have 23 grade 7 students and their 
teachers Carlena Bulicz and Tyra Thomas. And then their 
parent chaperone is Melani Blandin.  
 
And I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, when I grew up, St. Brieux 
and Englefeld were small communities. And we’ve seen a lot of 
schools close over the years, and I just want to mention the 
courage and the hard work that a lot of the companies we have 
in these small communities do to keep the schools open. And I 
know Englefeld has grown, and Bourgault Industries in St. 
Brieux, we’ve seen an addition on to that school. So we really 
appreciate the hard work of the companies, and we’re glad to 
have the students in schools that are growing rather than 
closing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of Her 
Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, I’d like to join you in welcoming 
the Ontario legislative interns here to our legislature. I 
understand they’re here to attend the humanities congress in the 
city. And we wish you a lot of enjoyment and learning from that 
program, but also here at the legislature. We had a great lunch, 
and we appreciate that opportunity to talk about Saskatchewan 
and share those insights. 
 
I just want to say how important interns are to the legislatures, 
and we sure hope that at some point we see our own 
Saskatchewan legislative internship return. These young people 
really highlight the contributions of what interns can bring to 
the legislature. With that, I’d ask all members to join me and 
welcome these folks to our legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to 
introduce someone in this Assembly who has been introduced 
before, but I believe needs to be introduced again: in the west 
gallery, Dr. Scott Francis. He’s a good friend from White City. 
He’s a doctorate in leadership. He is an author and also a first 
responder at White City and again, a very good friend. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all members to welcome Scott to his Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to introduce 
a guest in the east gallery who is no stranger to this House. It’s 
Larry Hubich. He’s the president of Saskatchewan Federation 
of Labour. And he has a lot of respect from his colleagues 
because this is his eighth term, Mr. Speaker, as the president of 
the Saskatchewan labour. So that is pretty impressive. 
 
Larry is a strong advocate for workers’ rights, but not only that, 
he advocates for all Saskatchewan residents, and that’s much to 
be admired. So thank you, Larry. He also played a big role, Mr. 
Speaker, with assuring that Bill 40 was completely repealed, 
and I think that’s important as well. 
 
And so we know that Larry isn’t afraid to hold both sides of this 
House accountable, and we really appreciate that. Thank you 
for all the hard work you do in this province. So I ask that all 
members welcome Larry to his legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member opposite in welcoming Mr. Hubich to the 
legislature today. I was recently made aware that he is currently 
the longest serving president of any provincial federation of 
labour in Canada, as I am the longest serving Minister of 
Labour Relations in Canada right now. 
 
And while we may not agree on everything, and we’ve certainly 
had some disagreements . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I hear 
my colleague behind chirping that we’ll ride off into the sunset 
together. The simple reality, Mr. Speaker, is one of the things 
that we do agree on is that we’re both aging incredibly 



4434 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2018 

gracefully and have developed exceptional charm and wit as we 
get older. 
 
But on a more serious note, I want to thank him for being a 
colleague and a friend. His dedication to workplace safety and 
to the workers in our province is absolutely critical to how we 
go forward, and I regard him as a friend. And I understand he’s 
indicated he’s not going to be running again, and want to wish 
him well and ask him to stay in touch, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you, seated in your gallery, my 
constituency assistant, Kelly Zazula. Kelly has been working 
within the constituency of, first Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, now 
Regina Rochdale, for 10 years.  
 
Her dedication to the constituents in the riding is absolutely 
incredible. She is conscientious and always just goes to the wall 
to help everyone. So I appreciate her hard work and her 
dedication because she makes my job easy. And some days, you 
know, we try to be everywhere and try and do everything, but 
Kelly makes it all happen. So I appreciate her dedication and 
her hard work, and I just want everyone here to welcome her to 
her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
seated in the west gallery are two guests that I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly. In fact this is, I think, their second time 
visiting together. First, Gwen Wright, from the city of 
Weyburn. Gwen is a long-time educator in the city of Weyburn. 
She is very active in the community. She’s on the board of the 
Wor-Kin Shop. She is, I believe, involved with the Rotary Club, 
very involved with theatre in the city of Weyburn, and as well is 
very involved in her church, the Free Methodist Church of 
Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And seated with her is my constituency assistant, Marcie 
Swedburg. Marcie has been the constituency assistant for 18 
years. And just to show how good of a constituency assistant 
she is, Mr. Speaker, from my seat here I wasn’t sure of the 
number, and so with a series of hand signals, I was able to get 
the number of years that it’s been. So it’s been 18 years Marcie 
worked for the previous MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly], and for me for the last 12 years.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s appropriate that I’m introducing 
Marcie the day after I introduced my mother in the Legislative 
Assembly because Marcie certainly has become much more 
than just a constituency assistant in my life. She’s a very much 
trusted and valued friend to me. And so I would just ask all 
members to help me in welcoming Gwen and Marcie to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Well we still have a half-hour. Are you sure? 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 

Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan.  
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Lloydminster, 
Frenchman Butte, Paradise Hill, Turtleford, St. Walburg. I do 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. And 
the undersigned residents of the province want to bring to our 
attention the following: that Saskatchewan’s outdated election 
Act allows corporations, unions, and individuals, even those 
living outside the province, to make unlimited donations to our 
province’s political parties.  
 
And we know that the people of Saskatchewan deserve to live 
in a fair province where all voices are equal and money can’t 
influence politics. And we know, Mr. Speaker, that over the 
past 10 years the Saskatchewan Party has received $12.61 
million in corporate donations and, of that, $2.87 million come 
from companies outside of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan politics should belong to Saskatchewan people. 
And we know that the federal government and the provinces of 
Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and even British 
Columbia have moved to limit this influence and level the 
playing field by banning corporate and union donations to 
political parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign finance laws 
to end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 
from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 
on individual donations. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today come 
from the cities of North Battleford and Swift Current. I do so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition calling on the government to restore the 
Saskatchewan rental housing supplement. We know that this is 
an important amount of money that was being received, a 
marginal amount of money that was being received, but so 
crucial for keeping ahead . . . over the most vulnerable and 



May 30, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4435 

keeping them off the streets, Mr. Speaker. These citizens wish 
to bring to your attention that rents remain unaffordably high 
for many, since the cost of living has increased significantly in 
the last decade while Social Services benefits have remained 
unchanged. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to immediately restore the 
Saskatchewan rental housing supplement. 

 
This particular petition, as we’ve presented for a number of 
days here, Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by 
individuals from Saskatoon today. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical workplace supports for 
survivors of domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has 
the very dubious distinction of having the highest rates of 
domestic violence amongst all the provinces in Canada, and we 
know we must do so much more to protect survivors of 
interpersonal violence. 
 
For many who experience that violence, the violence will 
follow them to the workplace, which is why the signatories to 
this petition are calling for five days of paid leave and up to 17 
weeks of unpaid leave be made available to workers who are 
survivors of domestic violence, and that critical workplace 
supports made available to survivors of domestic violence be 
also made available to workers living with PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder] as a result of domestic violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is what those who are on the front line of this 
crisis, those who are working with the survivors are calling for. 
The YWCA [Young Women’s Christian Association] of Regina 
and PATHS [Provincial Association of Transition Houses and 
Services of Saskatchewan] are two examples of such 
organizations. This is also similar to what we saw in the 
government’s own Domestic Violence Death Review Report, 
where it spoke to the importance of ensuring that there are 
workplace supports for survivors of interpersonal violence. 
 
[13:45] 
 
They all see the importance of ensuring that those who are 
fleeing situations of violence are able to maintain their 
employment so that they can have a steady income so they can 
actually be able to transition away from places of violence, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This is what we’ve called for in our private member’s bill, Bill 
No. 609, the fourth time we’ve put forward these provisions in 
the last two years. The time is limited for the government to 
pass this legislation. It’s time for them to step up, do the right 
thing, and pass these provisions.  
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon the 
Sask Party government to pass legislation to ensure critical 
supports in the workplace, including reasonable 
accommodation and paid and unpaid leave for survivors of 
domestic violence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today come 
from Regina. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Missing Children’s Month 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the House today to acknowledge May as Missing Children’s 
Month in Saskatchewan. It is an opportunity to raise awareness 
by dispelling myths about missing person situations, profiling 
individual cases, highlighting agency supports within 
communities. 
 
Every year about 4,500 missing persons reports are filed in the 
province. Most are runaway children and youth. Fortunately the 
majority of these cases are solved within 48 hours, thanks to the 
work of family, police, social services staff, community 
workers, and others. However, even one missing child is one 
too many. 
 
Our government takes this issue very seriously and has taken 
steps to provide a number of supports. The Ministry of Justice 
is a partner in the provincial partnership committee on missing 
persons, along with members from indigenous, police, and 
community agencies. They work to help prevent people from 
going missing, support a coordinated response when people do 
go missing, and provide services for victims’ families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ministry also provides annual funding to Child 
Find Saskatchewan, and provided, through its Criminal 
Property Forfeiture Fund, support to the Missing Children 
Society of Canada. While these are positive steps, there is still a 
long way to go. 
 
I ask all members of this Assembly in acknowledging May as 
Missing Children’s Month. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Riverside School Aboriginal Arts Festival 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 16th I was 
pleased to attend the performing arts portion of the third annual 
Riverside Aboriginal Arts Festival at the E.A. Rawlinson 
Centre in Prince Albert. The show featured jigging, drums, a 
rattle group, and indigenous-themed songs. Mr. Speaker, the 
performers were from grade 1 to 8 at Riverside School. During 
the first week in June, the Riverside Aboriginal Arts Festival 
will display the visual art and creative writing portion of its 
showcase at the John V. Hicks Gallery in downtown Prince 
Albert. 



4436 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2018 

Riverside School is in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, with a 
high indigenous population, and this festival celebrates their 
traditions and culture. I visit Riverside several times a year, and 
I am always impressed with the staff and students at the school 
and all that they have accomplished.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to extend my congratulations to the young 
performers and artists in this festival, and thank them for 
sharing their culture, traditions, and talent with us. It would be 
impossible to have this event without dedicated teachers, 
mentors, families, and sponsors. Thank you for each of them for 
making this festival a reality.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
congratulating the participants and organizers of the Riverside 
Aboriginal Arts Festival. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 
 

Close Cuts for Cancer 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 
Saturday, people from Yorkton and area gathered at the 
Parkland Mall for the 21st Annual Brayden Ottenbreit Close 
Cuts for Cancer head-shaving event. I was happy to take part 
this year in person, after having to participate virtually last year 
via FaceTime from Yorkton’s ICU [intensive care unit] after 
my own cancer surgery.  
 
What started in 1998, with friends and family morally 
supporting my four-year-old son and raising a few dollars for 
cancer research, has evolved over two decades. It now funds 
cutting-edge research through the Saskatchewan Cancer 
Agency, as well as supports those fighting cancer through many 
local and provincial initiatives. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, Brayden lost his battle shortly 
before the third annual event, but our family was encouraged to 
just do it one more time in his memory. That was 18 events ago. 
Although my family continues to do this in memory of our 
Brayden — gone too soon — it now has everything to do with 
supporting patients and their families in their journey, having 
some fun while we do it, and raising dollars for very important 
initiatives. 
 
Close Cuts has raised $45,000 so far this year, and some 
significant satellite events are still to come. To date, Close Cuts 
has raised over $850,000. Honourable mention goes to city 
councillor Aaron Kienle and his son Derek, 10 years old, who 
raised 16,000 and $2,000, respectively, this year. We’re so very 
thankful for all of the corporate and private financial support, 
the participants, the volunteers. It just couldn’t happen without 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking all those 
who helped make Brayden Ottenbreit Close Cuts for Cancer a 
success each year, and to keep those affected by cancer in their 
prayers.  
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Volunteer Teachers Honoured 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize 
Saskatchewan’s heritage language teachers, students, and 
schools. On May 7th I had the opportunity once again to attend 
and speak at the annual Heritage Language Volunteer Teacher 
Award night hosted by the Multilingual Association of Regina, 
MLAR. The member for Gardiner Park also attended. 
 
The annual event is held to honour volunteer teachers who have 
committed themselves to the teaching of heritage languages, 
and whose invaluable services have made an incredible 
difference within our community. MLAR is a non-profit and is 
committed to the retention and promotion of heritage languages 
in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, language is the foundation of culture, thus a 
foundation of our multicultural province. Heritage language 
schools are established all across our province and are vital in 
supporting settlement in Saskatchewan and supporting the 
strength in our diversity. Their very modest funding was cut a 
few years ago by the Sask Party government, but know that the 
official opposition, Saskatchewan New Democrats, will 
continue to work to restore that important funding, which 
represents an investment culturally, socially, and economically. 
 
I want to thank MLAR and its leadership and all of the teachers, 
schools, volunteer organizations, cultural associations, and 
supporters of heritage language within our province, and thank 
them for putting our province’s motto, “from many peoples, 
strength,” into action. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Hudson Bay Student Wins  
Junior Citizen of the Year Award 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
June 25th the Lieutenant Governor will be presenting four 
Junior Citizen of the Year Awards to deserving youth from 
across the province. One of the recipients, Georgia Edwards, is 
a student at Hudson Bay Community School. 
 
The prestigious Junior Citizen of the Year program is sponsored 
by the Saskatchewan Weekly Newspapers Association in 
conjunction with SaskPower and the Lieutenant Governor of 
Saskatchewan. This program recognizes outstanding 
contributions by youth in the province and has been running for 
over 40 years now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In April, the members of the Junior Citizen selection committee 
gathered at Government House in Regina with the task of 
narrowing down over 120 nominations down to just four. 
Certain criteria must be fulfilled in order to become a recipient 
of this award, including having a positive lifestyle, dedicated to 
the community and school, have a strong sense of caring and 
responsibility, have the ability to overcome life’s challenges, 
inspires others, and must be between the ages of 8 to 18. 
 
Georgia and the three other recipients will receive a $3,000 
bursary towards their post-secondary education from 
SaskPower. Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan W. Thomas 



May 30, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4437 

Molloy will present the awards at a ceremony at Government 
House in Regina on June 25th. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating Ms. 
Georgia Edwards in being honoured with the 2018 Junior 
Citizen of the Year Award. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 

Crescent Point Place Legend Retires 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, in almost every community 
across Saskatchewan the hub of activity in winter is the local 
rink. The Colosseum, now Crescent Point Place, is just that 
place for Weyburn. Mr. Speaker, teams, coaches, players, and 
parents come and go over the course of over three decades, but 
for the Colosseum, one person has been the constant, and that’s 
been Myrna McFadden. 
 
Earlier this month, Myrna ended her 34-year stint as the 
operator of the concession booth. And she did it in the way that 
she started: surrounded by her family. Wearing a shirt 
proclaiming “The Legend Has Retired,” she was greeted by 
friends and families at a come-and-go reception in the 
afternoon, and that evening 170 attended a celebration in her 
honour. Rink burgers were on the menu. 
 
Starting in September 1st of 1984, she has seen it all at Crescent 
Point Place: an RBC Cup, an Esso national championship, 
league championships, countless minor hockey games, and even 
an MMA [mixed martial arts] event. Her celebration was all 
about family. It was her own kids that worked for her in the 
early days, and now it has been her grandkids working at her 
side. She has been serving food and drinks and candy to the 
kids of the kids that were her first customers. And she has really 
enjoyed getting to know the Weyburn Red Wings over those 
30-plus years, knowing that for many of them it was their first 
time living away from home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, later this summer when hockey schools are in full 
swing, Myrna’s not going to be there. Myrna and her kids will 
now have the time to fulfill her lifelong dream to travel to 
Memphis to visit Graceland. So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all 
members to join with me in congratulating Myrna and wishing 
her all the best in her retirement. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

Special Olympics Saskatchewan SaskTel Awards 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this past weekend, the Special Olympics Saskatchewan SaskTel 
Awards Banquet was held in Saskatoon. This event celebrates 
the great athletes, volunteers, supporters, sponsors, and many 
other individuals and organizations that provide these athletes 
with the opportunity to participate in sports, training, and 
competition. 
 
These individuals allow the Special Olympic athletes to makes 
lifelong friends and create lasting memories. Their recognition 
is much deserved. Mr. Speaker, I wish we had more time 

allotted to list all of the winners and nominees as well as those 
significant accomplishments of all these individuals, as every 
one of them deserve their own recognition. Their incredible 
efforts have enabled Special Olympics Saskatchewan to achieve 
all of its success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Special Olympics athlete oath is, “Let me win, 
but if I cannot win, let me be brave in the attempt.” These 
individuals exemplify the inspiring oath, not only through 
athletics but through life in general. Each and every one of these 
athletes make their communities and province very proud for 
what they do both on and off the field. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this entire Assembly, I want to 
congratulate all the award winners at the Special Olympics 
Saskatchewan SaskTel Awards Banquet and thank all those 
involved in making this event a success. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Payments to Former Public Servant 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Life has become less 
affordable for people in Saskatchewan with prices rising faster 
in this province than anywhere else in the country. And 
Saskatchewan people are having to work harder than ever to 
make every dollar count. And it’s hard to imagine what could 
be more out of line with that reality than this government’s 
decision to keep paying Saskatchewan Party leadership 
candidate Alanna Koch tens of thousands of dollars long after 
her failed bid for the premier’s chair has ended. 
 
Yesterday we heard that this hand-picked head of the civil 
service has been back on the government payroll since the end 
of January and on a paid leave since the 6th of April. And based 
on answers from the Premier in estimates, that means she’s 
been collecting more than $22,000 a month — over $40,000 so 
far. How does the Premier justify paying such a huge sum of 
money to this Sask Party insider when so many in our province 
are just barely scraping by? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I endeavoured yesterday to 
provide the information with respect to the wages. Since April 
the 6th it’s $38,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier today the cabinet of the Government of 
Saskatchewan approved an order in council to cancel the 
appointment of Alanna Koch as deputy minister, effective June 
the 1st. We’re currently in the process of negotiating a 
severance package with Ms. Koch, and she’ll be treated like any 
other employee is treated within the public service in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s a number of factors that are included when determining 
the appropriate level of severance, including the years of 
service, Mr. Speaker, as well as age. And the fact is this, Mr. 
Speaker, is Ms. Koch and the government have agreed that the 
last two months since she has been on paid leave will be 



4438 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2018 

accounted for in the final severance payout determination. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know it’s not 
unprecedented for people to take an unpaid leave to run for 
office, but it’s extremely unusual for someone to be placed on 
paid leave when they return, to figure out their career path. 
 
If the Premier didn’t want Alanna Koch as his deputy minister, 
that’s fine. But he should have dealt with this immediately 
when he came into office, not waiting until June 1st. And 
instead of a clean break, we’ve already paid tens of thousands 
of dollars to keep her on the payroll without any work 
whatsoever being done. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Now we’ve been told by the minister that the cafeteria workers 
in this building, that that’s costing us $30,000 a year. Mr. 
Speaker, $30,000 is enough for them to make the decision to 
put those people out of work, but apparently $38,000 for no 
work at all from Alanna Koch is acceptable to this government. 
 
So on top of this ongoing salary without duties, on top of this 
paid leave, how much are we going to be facing in severance 
for this person to have made the choice to go and run for the 
Sask Party leadership? How much are we going to be on the 
hook for while she took that break to explore her political 
options? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of 
inaccuracies in that question. The fact of the matter is, I did 
disclose the amount here that has been paid since April the 6th. 
It’s $38,000, but credit to Ms. Koch and the conversations that 
are going on, as I said that Alanna Koch and the Government of 
Saskatchewan have agreed that that time period when she’d 
return on paid leave, Mr. Speaker, will be included, will be 
included in and accounted for in the final severance package 
that is put forward. 
 
These things take time, Mr. Speaker, to negotiate when 
someone . . . negotiate a severance with someone that has 
served in the public service. Each and every situation is 
different, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll continue and endeavour to 
not negotiate the numbers or disclose the numbers here on the 
floor of the legislature, but we’ll engage with Ms. Koch and 
ensure that she is treated as anyone in the public service is. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lakeview. 
 

Former Member and Activities in China  
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, it’s one thing to do the right thing 
and something completely other to only do the right thing after 
you get caught. We’ve been trying for weeks to get the Premier 
to remember the details of his meeting with Bill Boyd on his 
irrigation scheme. And let’s remember this is the irrigation 
scheme Bill Boyd was promoting in China that eventually led to 
him being found in breach of conflict of interest laws, the 
reason that he resigned from politics. Given the magnitude of 

this issue and Boyd’s peppered history, it’s more than passing 
strange that the Premier can’t remember any details about this 
meeting. 
 
And now we’re learning Boyd and his associate were also in 
contact with his right-hand man, William Wang, the top civil 
servant in charge of seeking Chinese investment — exactly the 
kind of investment Bill Boyd went to China to promote. Top to 
bottom, Mr. Speaker, this whole thing stinks. What steps has 
the Premier taken to investigate to what extent Bill Boyd used 
his connections in the civil service to pursue his own agenda in 
China? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 
number of those questions have been asked and answered in 
this Assembly previous, so I will not answer those questions 
again, Mr. Speaker, here today. 
 
But the fact of the matter is, is there’s some legitimate concerns 
and questions that have been made regarding a member of the 
public service here just recently. And we take these questions 
very, very seriously, Mr. Speaker, as the Government of 
Saskatchewan. It’s my understanding that the Minister of Trade 
and Export has asked the deputy minister of Trade and Export 
to review these concerns. The fact of the matter is that the 
public service has very strong conflict of interest guidelines, 
and we expect that those guidelines will be adhered to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, scrambling to do the 
right thing after they get caught. Let’s remember that over the 
years, Saskatchewan taxpayers paid tens of thousands of dollars 
to fly Bill Boyd, Laurie Pushor, and William Wang around the 
world. Ministerial travel records indicate that Boyd and Wang 
have travelled to China to “build new relationships with those 
that are considering investment opportunities in Saskatchewan.” 
Mr. Speaker, that sounds an awful lot like Bill Boyd was doing 
in his follow-up trip to China, where he was found to have 
breached conflict of interest laws. 
 
The Conflict of Interest Commissioner’s report said the scope 
of what he could investigate was limited. Neither Wang nor the 
Premier can find it in themselves to remember the details of 
their dealings with Bill Boyd in the period around this trip. Who 
knew what, when as it relates to this China trip — it matters. 
Simply saying, I don’t recall simply does not cut it. Has the 
potential relationship between Boyd and his former officials 
been looked into? And if not, will the Premier commit to that 
today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the Premier 
had addressed that specific question in the previous answer. We 
expect public servants and we expect MLAs to adhere to 
conflict of interest guidelines. The former member from 
Kindersley was found to not have adhered to conflict of interest 
guidelines and was kicked out of this caucus, Mr. Speaker, as a 
result of that. 
 



May 30, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4439 

There were legitimate questions that were raised regarding a 
member of the public service, Mr. Speaker. We take those 
questions seriously and because of that I spoke to my deputy 
minister this morning and I asked if she would conduct a review 
with regard to these specific concerns. That is going to be going 
forward. The public service have very clear and very strong 
guidelines around conflict of interest, Mr. Speaker. We expect 
those guidelines to be followed and adhered to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

PST on Construction Labour 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — This government’s decision to slap the 6 per 
cent PST [provincial sales tax] on construction labour is hurting 
everyone in our province, but it’s municipalities looking to 
upgrade facilities and maintain their infrastructure who are 
among the hardest hit. Adding the PST to construction labour 
adds thousands of dollars to the costs of maintaining our towns 
and cities. And in my community of Prince Albert, municipal 
leaders are speaking out. Councillor Don Cody said, “This is 
harming our community, without any question.” And Mayor 
Greg Dionne said yesterday that this decision “has killed our 
construction industry.” 
 
Does the Minister of Finance realize that her government’s 
decision to force municipalities to pay PST on construction 
labour is hurting municipalities and hurting people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been over a year ago 
now when we had a budget, quite frankly, where we were 
shifting away from our reliance on resource revenue. The 
reason why was for four years our resource revenues have fallen 
by $1.2 billion. In order to have the services that we have 
within the province and to have the services that the people of 
the province expect, quite frankly, we need to find those 
revenues somewhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are not going to run deficits year over year 
over year. We feel getting back to balance and being stable is 
extremely important. That involved difficult decisions and one 
of those decisions is the one that the member opposite just 
mentioned, which was expanding the PST base. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we still have the lowest PST of all provinces 
that have PST within our country. We’re among the lowest 
personal income tax within our country. We have the lowest 
corporate income tax, Mr. Speaker. We’re among the lowest 
small-business tax. We have the highest income threshold for a 
small business, so we’re still tax competitive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — When municipalities applied for 
infrastructure grants over the last few years, they did so under 
the impression that they wouldn’t have to pay PST on their 
share of the project. But now that those projects are under way 
and the contractors need to be paid, municipalities are left 
holding the bag once again. It’s just another example of this 

government downloading costs onto towns and cities; except 
this time, the money goes back to the provincial government. 
It’s not fair. 
 
Will the Sask Party do the right thing for workers, for jobs, and 
for our municipalities? Will they scrap their 6 per cent PST on 
construction labour? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s kind of 
interesting. I’ve had a conversation, as has the Minister of 
Government Relations, with SARM [Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities] and SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association] on this particular issue. And they 
have been advised for any specific case where there was a 
project that was already approved and under way that got 
caught in this gap, to please bring it forward; we would look at 
it case-by-case. To our knowledge, none have come forward. So 
if the member opposite knows of such a construction that was 
under way, by all means, we’re more than happy to look at it 
and she can bring that forward to us to work on. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, again what is the NDP [New Democratic 
Party] plan in order to make up for this gap? The resource 
revenue is still down $1.2 billion. They want more spending in 
health care. They want more spending in education. They want 
more spending in social issues. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, we have not heard one 
economic plan coming from the members opposite, other than a 
carbon tax. And quite frankly, if they want to talk about what’s 
going to hurt the people and the municipalities within the 
province, let’s just talk about a carbon tax. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Parental Leave Benefits 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, the federal government created 
an extended parental leave that allows for parents to take up to a 
year and a half off work to be with their children. But families 
in Saskatchewan can’t access these benefits because the Sask 
Party government has failed to change The Saskatchewan 
Employment Act. We asked the Sask Party government to make 
this change but they won’t commit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is an easy fix to bring the provincial legislation 
in line with that of the federal government is offering. Alberta 
and Ontario has already done it and it’s a common-sense 
approach. So will the Minister of Labour commit to making this 
change to the legislation and stop blocking Saskatchewan 
families from extended parental leave? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the last 
number of years, the federal government has increased 



4440 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2018 

employment insurance benefits to include a number of different 
leaves. In each and every case when that’s happened, this 
government has required employers to provide the additional 
time off for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite raises another one with 
extended maternity leave benefits, parental leave benefits, and, 
Mr. Speaker, the simple answer to her question is, yes, we’ll be 
doing it in the fall session. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Saskatoon Freeway Project 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan Party loves to sink endless amounts of taxpayers’ 
cash and dollars into their megaprojects: $2 billion into CCS 
[carbon capture and storage]; $2 billion on the Regina bypass; 
and over $50 million and counting on the Bill Boyd smart 
meters. 
 
Part of the government’s excuse for the smart meter fiasco was 
sinking soil. Well I guess that’s what happens when you hand 
out large government contracts to out-of-country companies 
who don’t have a clue about the realities of Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan people had to foot the bill to clean up the smart 
meter mess after, and I quote, “unexpected weather events.” 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as bad as Bill Boyd’s smart meters were, the 
Saskatchewan Party’s $2 billion Regina bypass is even more 
concerning. And we know the people of Balgonie have had 
concerns about the project. To the minister: have there been any 
issues with the bypass and sinking ground issues? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . .  
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll have a little order, thanks. Let him 
actually start to answer. I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re very proud of the Regina bypass project and we’re very 
proud of what’s happened on the east side of the city of Regina, 
Mr. Speaker. This is a good news story for those communities 
out there. They’re growing; they’re thriving. 
 
But the big thing is safety, Mr. Speaker. And even the 
community of Balgonie, we’ve met with the community of 
Balgonie. They’re happy with the bypass, their overpass that 
we’ve done for them. We’ve worked with them. In fact, quoting 
the fire chief from White City, Mr. Speaker, when he says that 
now they can’t remember the last time the jaws of life had been 
brought out to the east side of the city, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First and foremost, it’s about safety, and it is safety that we 
have delivered to the people on the east side of the city of 
Regina, and we will see those communities grow as a result of 
it, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatoon 
bypass seems an awful lot like the Regina bypass which now 
would potentially carry a price tag that has ballooned to $2 
billion. The Regina bypass has come under fire from the 
Provincial Auditor and is subject to dozens of lawsuits costing 
millions of dollars. This session the Highways minister rolled 
into the rotunda to clear the air, and I quote, “It’s no different 
than what we did on the Regina bypass.” Well, Mr. Speaker, 
that is scary stuff for taxpayers. 
 
To the minister: are you planning on handing out another 
multi-billion-dollar P3 [public-private partnership] deal to an 
out-of-country company like Vinci for the Saskatoon bypass? 
Or will you build it traditionally, keep the profits in 
Saskatchewan, and give the work to Saskatchewan companies 
and workers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatoon freeway or expressway, whatever we want to call it, 
is not even on the radar screen yet, Mr. Speaker. We have 
narrowed the scope of where the expressway would go. We’ve 
worked with the municipalities up there, with the city of 
Saskatoon and the RM [rural municipality] of Corman Park and 
we’ve narrowed that scope for them to continue development. 
 
Yes, the process hasn’t changed as far as what we did. The 
timing of the process has changed, Mr. Speaker and that’s what 
we’ve done. And that was a recommendation from the auditor, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Members of the Legislative Assembly  
Seeking Federal Office 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, Mr. Speaker, as we wrap up the session and head back 
home to our constituency for the summer months, I’m looking 
forward to engaging with people in my riding in Saskatoon 
Centre and working to bring their voices and their concerns 
back to this Assembly. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we know that some members of this House 
have won nominations to run federally and will be dedicating 
much of their time to federal politics. Now that’s a real shame, 
Mr. Speaker, because our job this summer is to represent and 
listen to Saskatchewan people, not to be out in the stumps, 
stumping for Andrew Scheer and the Conservatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Sask Party see anything wrong with this? 
Do they agree with me that we need to change our laws so that 
MLAs can’t get paid to campaign for federal parties? Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. That sounded a bit like a party question to me. But you 
know, I can assure members of this House and I know members 



May 30, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4441 

on this side of the aisle will be working very hard for their 
constituents, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to be going back to 
their ridings. They’re going to be doing the exact same . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yeah, right. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Yeah, right. This is the member from 
Athabasca says, yeah, right, Mr. Speaker. I can tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, we take at face value . . . We take at face . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Let’s keep our questions concerned 
with government business. Let’s keep our answers concerned 
with government business. I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Look, Mr. Speaker, we take at face 
value the honourable intentions of members on both that side 
and this side of the House. We know members are going to be 
doing their job. We know members are going to be working 
hard for their constituents, whatever side of the House they’re 
on. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, we could raise questions about the intentions 
of some of the members on that side as well, about what their 
future plans may be, Mr. Speaker, who may not be very happy 
with the leadership provided by the Leader of the Opposition. 
I’m not going to do that, Mr. Speaker. I’m not going to name 
names. I’m not going to, I’m not going to, I’m not going to 
point out any individual members, Mr. Speaker. But you know, 
members are going to be doing their job over the summer. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, the people 
of Saskatchewan expect their MLAs, who are paid with 
taxpayers’ dollars, are working for them instead of campaigning 
for the Conservatives. The voices . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Government business questions, please. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I’m talking about The Legislative 
Assembly Act. So with that in mind, we want to make sure the 
voices and concerns of people are brought back in the fall. But 
we see a situation where that may not be a situation in 
Saskatoon Eastview and Regina Walsh Acres. They may not 
make it back here. And to me, Mr. Speaker, that’s not okay. So 
will the ministers opposite make changes to The Legislative 
Assembly Act to ensure that those who are running in federal 
elections can’t also be sitting MLAs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I mean, members 
on both sides of the aisle, this side I can speak to in particular, 
we are going to continue to do their jobs over the course of the 
summer. Unless the member knows of by-elections that are 
going to be called federally, these members are going to be 
continuing to do their work, as did John Solomon when he was 
a nominated candidate for federal office on that side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker. Seems that when New Democrats are 
running federally, Mr. Speaker, that seems to be fine, but not 
the case on this side of the House. 

What I would say, Mr. Speaker, without equivocation, is that 
members are going to work hard. Members are going to do their 
job. Members are going to be representing their constituents to 
the best of their ability. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Operation of Legislative Building Cafeteria 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it takes a lot to be surprised by 
the Sask Party’s approach to the public service. Indeed they’ve 
had it out for the public servants since they first formed 
government, cutting 15 per cent of the entire civil service, then 
wanting to take $250 million out of public servants’ pockets. 
And now it’s that Premier’s promise to pay for his campaign 
promises by cutting 1,250 Crown and government jobs. 
 
But nothing shows the true colours of this government quite 
like how they treat the hardest-working, lowest-paid employees 
of the public service. Last year it was firing 230 cleaners, and 
then having them apply back for their old jobs at two-thirds the 
money. Now they are geared up to fire the hard-working men 
and women of the legislative cafeteria, and at what is an 
incredibly difficult time for the leadership of that kitchen. It 
isn’t too late for this government to change course and to do the 
right thing. Will they show some heart and scrap these callous 
cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 
question. These questions were posed in committee a number of 
weeks ago and I’m happy to answer them. We value — make 
no mistake — we value the good work that is done by every 
member of the public service in Saskatchewan. And certainly 
we reflect that in our dealings with them. We reflect that in 
honouring negotiations that take place. 
 
We want to also make sure that the operational efficiency of the 
Government of Saskatchewan continues. And in light of the 
operations of the cafeteria, we’re looking at all options and to 
go forward to ensure again that taxpayers’ dollars are spent very 
carefully so they can be used to employ public service, so they 
can be used for health care, education, and social services that 
are the priorities of this government. That’s what has happened 
since day one with this government and that’s what will 
continue. And it’ll be done with respect. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, this government had more than 
$20,000 a month to pay Alanna Koch while they finalized her 
severance. And I’m sure that that won’t be a small number. But 
when it comes to the legislative cafeteria, the Sask Party goes 
super-hawk and sets about firing them without any real warning 
or chance to make up a shortfall that is a fraction of what this 
Sask Party government happily forks over to Sask Party pals 
and insiders, Mr. Speaker. It’s not right. 
 
The tender that government has put out closes tomorrow. So 



4442 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2018 

there is still time for this government to get their priorities 
straight and to do right by the hard-working men and women 
who have done so much for all of us over the years. Will the 
minister, will that Premier, do the right thing and pull that 
tender before it’s too late? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much. Whether 
it’s Ms. Koch as a public servant or whether it’s the employees 
that are part of the cafeteria or any other employee in the public 
service of Saskatchewan, they can certainly know that they will 
be dealt with in a fair manner. 
 
What we’re talking about here certainly is the expenses and the 
operational efficiency of the cafeteria. We’ve gone out to the 
private sector and others to ask for their ideas on how to operate 
it more efficiently. Members opposite know that the cafeteria is 
operated at a deficit in the neighbourhood of $40,000 per year 
and we feel that it is incumbent upon us to look at all options 
and to treat everyone fairly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 610 — The Saskatchewan Employment  
(Extended Parental Leave) Amendment Act, 2018 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 610, The 
Saskatchewan Employment (Extended Parental Leave) 
Amendment Act, 2018 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Prince 
Albert Northcote that Bill No. 610, The Saskatchewan 
Employment (Extended Parental Leave) Amendment Act, 2018 
be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of 
Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the Committee of 
Finance. 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Supply 
 
The Chair: — The business before the committee are 
appropriation resolutions. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move the following resolution: 
 

Resolved that toward making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31st, 
2018, the sum of $142,623,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved resolution 
no. 1: 
 

Resolved that toward making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on the account of certain charges and 
expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending 
March 31, 2018, the sum of $142,623,000 be granted out 
of the General Revenue Fund. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move the following resolution: 
 

Resolved that toward making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31st, 
2019, the sum of $12,982,271,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved resolution 
no. 2: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2019, the sum of $12,982,271,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt the resolution? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. There being no further business before 
the committee, I would invite a member to move that the 
committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 
rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 
leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 
 



May 30, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4443 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 
agreed to certain resolutions, has instructed me to report the 
same and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read the first 
time? 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that the resolutions be now 
read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of the resolutions. 
 
The Speaker: — When will the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
Pursuant to rule 32(1) the Minister of Finance shall move first 
reading of The Appropriation Bill. I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Bill No. 131 — The Appropriation Act, 2018 (No. 2) 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that Bill No. 131, The 
Appropriation Act, 2018 (No. 2) be now introduced and read a 
first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 
No. 131, The Appropriation Act, 2018 (No. 2) be now 
introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Pursuant to rule 32(l)(e), I move that 
Bill No. 131, The Appropriation Act, 2018 (No. 2) be now read 
a second and third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved second 
and third reading of Bill No. 131, The Appropriation Act, 2018 
(No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second and third 
reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I’m advised that His Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor is here for Royal Assent. All please rise. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 14:32 His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following bills.] 
 
His Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly at its present session has passed several bills which in 
the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to 
which bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — Your Honour, the bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 85 - The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 
     2017 
Bill No. 129 - The Saskatchewan Technology Start-up  
     Incentive Act 
Bill No. 107 - The Provincial Emblems and Honours  
     Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 90 - The Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 91 - The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 123 - The Snowmobile (Fees) Amendment Act, 2018 
Bill No. 81 - The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment 
     Act, 2017 
Bill No. 88 - The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment 
     Act, 2017 
Bill No. 86 - The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 
     2017 
Bill No. 124 - The Environmental Management and Protection 
     (Environmental Handling Charges) Amendment 
     Act, 2018 
Bill No. 127 - The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018 
Bill No. 128 - The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2018 
Bill No. 110 - The Animal Protection Act, 2017 
Bill No. 83 - The Environmental Management and Protection 
     Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 125 - The Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture 
     Incentive Act 
Bill No. 126 - The Energy Export Act 
Bill No. 89 - The School Choice Protection Act/Loi sur la 
     protection du choix d’école  
Bill No. 92 - The Saskatchewan Telecommunications 

Amendment Act, 2017 



4444 Saskatchewan Hansard May 30, 2018 

Bill No. 93 - The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2017 

Bill No. 73 - The Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 99 - The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 

(No. 2)/Loi modificative no 2 de 2017 sur 
l’interprétation 

Bill No. 103 - The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 
Bill No. 106 - The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death 

Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 111 - The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) 

Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 113 - The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 

2017 
Bill No. 76 - The Parks Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 115 - The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 

2017 
Bill No. 121 - The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
Bill No. 122 - The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2018/Loi de 
2018 corrélative de la loi intitulée The Cannabis 
Control (Saskatchewan) Act 

Bill No. 114 - The Vehicles for Hire Act 
Bill No. 112 - The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes 

(Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 82 - The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these bills. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 
government to defray the expenses of the public service. 
 
In the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour: 
 
Bill No. 131 - The Appropriation Act, 2018 (No. 2) 
 
to which bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty's name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this bill. 
 
[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:38.] 
 
The Speaker: — Please be seated. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved to 
adjourn this House. Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned until 
10 a.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:39.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4433 
  Goudy ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4433 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4433 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4433 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4433 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4433 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4434 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4434 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4434 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4434 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4434 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4435 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Missing Children’s Month 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4435 
 Riverside School Aboriginal Arts Festival 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4435 
 Close Cuts for Cancer 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4436 
 Volunteer Teachers Honoured 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4436 
 Hudson Bay Student Wins Junior Citizen of the Year Award 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4436 
 Crescent Point Place Legend Retires 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4437 
 Special Olympics Saskatchewan SaskTel Awards 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4437 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Payments to Former Public Servant 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4437 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4437 
 Former Member and Activities in China  
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4438 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4438 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4438 
 PST on Construction Labour 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4439 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4439 
 Parental Leave Benefits 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4439 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4439 
 Saskatoon Freeway Project 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4440 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4440 
 Members of the Legislative Assembly Seeking Federal Office 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4440 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4440 
 Operation of Legislative Building Cafeteria 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4441 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4441 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 610 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Extended Parental Leave) Amendment Act, 2018 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4442 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Supply 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4442 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4443 



 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 Bill No. 131 — The Appropriation Act, 2018 (No. 2) 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4443 
ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4443 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


