


















































May 2, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 52A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 2, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4151 
 May 2, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to introduce to this House, through you and through all 
members of this House, Mr. Speaker, someone who really 
needs no introduction in this Assembly whatsoever, someone 
who I think is a good friend to members on both sides of the 
House. 
 
And with us today, Mr. Speaker, is Mr. Rod Gantefoer. Mr. 
Gantefoer was a former Finance minister for the province of 
Saskatchewan, the former member for the constituency of 
Melfort, Mr. Speaker. And Rod is in town for some meetings 
today. 
 
Rod was also first elected to this Assembly in 1995, Mr. 
Speaker, as a Liberal. Mr. Speaker, Rod was a member of that 
renowned group of conservatives and Liberals that came 
together to change the course of political history in the province 
of Saskatchewan forever. Rod is a founding member of this 
party, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party, and in 2007 he 
became the first Finance minister in Saskatchewan Party 
history. Mr. Speaker, we have another one in the back, Mr. Ken 
Krawetz. But today we have Mr. Rod Gantefoer in the House 
here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are so grateful for the work that Rod has undertaken on 
behalf of the STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] 
foundation in the province of Saskatchewan as the executive 
vice-president, busy, Mr. Speaker, across the province 
fundraising and building community partnerships for that 
important organization, and no more important than in the last 
number of weeks, Mr. Speaker. STARS provided a vitally 
important health service to all communities across the province 
of Saskatchewan. We are eternally indebted to Rod’s work with 
that foundation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to welcome 
Mr. Gantefoer to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the official opposition, it’s an honour to join with the Premier to 
welcome Rod Gantefoer to his Assembly. You would be hard 
pressed to find a more decent person, Mr. Speaker, that’s graced 
this Assembly on either side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had good debates over the years with Rod 
when he served as Finance minister, but he’s certainly 
somebody who has served his province. And I’m thankful as 
well for his continued work and service with STARS, 
something that certainly benefits our entire province. So to Rod 
and Carole we say thank you for their service, and we welcome 

them to the Assembly here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Goudy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I would like to introduce some special people who are 
sitting in your gallery. I would like to introduce Jesse Rudge. 
He’s one of the three partners with Avatex. Gord Dmytruk, he’s 
one of the mangers with Avatex. They’re a company who’s 
done some developments recently in my hometown. Brent Lutz, 
he’s with the city of Melfort, an administrator, and a good 
friend. Also a good friend of mine, family friend, here’s Eben 
Strydom, one of the family physicians and an anesthesiologist 
in my hometown who’s helped make this project work as well. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I would like to introduce someone 
that you all know, who helps me stand, and one of my mentors, 
somebody who I stand in his shadow, and that’s Rod Gantefoer. 
And I’m privileged to have him here and more thankful, than all 
the things that he’s done for the province of Saskatchewan, 
personally what he’s done for me and my town. We appreciate 
Rod very much. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, it’s my pleasure to introduce, 
from the Carnduff Education Complex, a group of grade 8, 11, 
and 12 students seated in the western gallery, 24 all told. 
 
Their teacher today is Blair Beck, who is also known to 
someone else on the floor. He is the brother to the member from 
Regina Lakeview. Accompanying this group is another teacher, 
Trevor Geiger, also from the Carnduff school. And both Trevor 
and Blair took part in the SSTI [Saskatchewan Social Sciences 
Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary Democracy] educational 
program provided through the Speaker’s office. I met with the 
students and teachers this morning for a question-and-answer 
period, Mr. Speaker. 
 
While I’m on my feet, I would also like to welcome my former 
colleague and collaborator with the Sask Party, Rod Gantefoer. 
 
So I would ask everyone to welcome the students to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As has been noted, it is 
my pleasure to stand up today and once again welcome my 
younger brother, Blair Beck, otherwise known as Mr. Beck, to 
this Legislative Assembly.  
 
I realize, I think this is the third time that I have introduced him. 
I don’t know if he likes hearing me say things on the record, 
nice things about him, but . . . No, I am joking, Mr. Speaker. He 
does a really good job of making sure that students in his 
classroom have opportunities to come to Agribition or this 
Assembly or to trips out of the province. And I had the 
opportunity to meet briefly with his grade 8 class today, and 
they asked some great questions. And I would invite all 
members to join me in welcoming him and his class to this 



4152 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2018 

Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member of 
Humboldt-Watrous. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 
honour today, Mr. Speaker, to stand to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, a very 
great class of 25 students from Humboldt Collegiate Institute. 
And accompanying them is someone who’s no stranger, as he 
comes each and every year with a class, is their teacher, Mr. 
David Millette. They also have with them an EA [educational 
assistant], Ms. Margaret Nagy. And I want to have everyone 
join me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from the citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Paradise Hill, 
Frenchman Butte, and St. Walburg. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition calling on the Sask Party to stop the attacks on our 
already strained school system. Mr. Speaker, those who have 
signed this petition today wish to bring our attention to a few 
items: that the Sask Party cut $54 million from kids’ classrooms 
last year, and the fact that this year’s budget restores only a 
fraction of that cut.  
 
Of course, the $24 million year-over-year cut means that the 
Sask Party is making us all pay more while our classrooms 
actually get less, Mr. Speaker. And, as would reasonably be 
expected, these cuts have had devastating impact on classrooms 
all around the province, leading to increases in PTR 
[pupil/teacher ratio], leading to reductions in support staff that 
children require in order to get the education that they need. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the government to fully restore the senseless cuts to our 
kids’ classrooms and stop making families, teachers, and 
everyone who works to support our education system pay 
the price for the Sask Party’s mismanagement. 
 

Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
Lumsden and in Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. And 
the undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan want 
to bring to our attention the following: that Saskatchewan’s 
outdated election Act allows corporations, unions, and 
individuals, even those outside the province, to make unlimited 
donations to our province’s political parties. And we know that 
the people of Saskatchewan deserve to live in a fair province 
where all voices are equal and money can’t influence politics. 
 
We know that over the past 10 years, the Saskatchewan Party 
has received $12.61 million in corporate donations and, of that, 
2.87 million came from companies outside Saskatchewan. You 
know, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan politics should belong to 
Saskatchewan people, and that the federal government and the 
provinces of Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and now 
British Columbia have moved to limit this influence and level 
the playing field by banning corporate and union donations to 
political parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan campaign finance laws, to 
end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 
from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 
on individual donations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical workplace supports for 
survivors of domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has 
the highest rates of domestic violence in Canada, and we all 
know that we must do much more to protect survivors of 
interpersonal violence.  
 
For many of them, Mr. Speaker, the violence will follow them 
to their workplaces, which is why the signatories to this petition 
are calling for five days of paid leave and up to 17 weeks of 
unpaid leave be made available to workers who are survivors of 
interpersonal violence, and that critical workplace supports 
made available for survivors of domestic violence be also made 
available to workers living with PTSD [post-traumatic stress 
disorder] as a result of domestic violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what those who are on the front line of this 
crisis are calling for. This is also what we’ve called for in our 
private member’s bill, Bill No. 609, which is the fourth time 
we’ve tabled those provisions in this House in the last two 
years. It’s time for the Sask Party to step up, do the right thing, 
and pass that legislation. 
 



May 2, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4153 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to pass legislation to ensure 
critical supports in the workplace, including reasonable 
accommodation and paid and unpaid leave to survivors of 
domestic violence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today come 
from Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to rise in my place once again to present a petition on 
Orkambi. Whereas Orkambi is the first drug to treat the basic 
defect in the largest population of Canadians with cystic 
fibrosis. It can slow disease progression, allowing patients to 
live longer, healthier lives. 
 

So we, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
urge the Ministry of Health to negotiate a fair price of 
Orkambi and make it available through the Saskatchewan 
drug plan for those who meet the conditions set out by 
Health Canada and the clinical criteria established by the 
Canadian CF clinicians. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition, and 
there have been many, many pages signed, and I’ve presented a 
number of petitions over time, but the people that have signed 
this particular page are from Lloydminster and Marshall. I so 
present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Regina Doctor Helps Newcomers  
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like to 
recognize someone who is working diligently to provide health 
care to some of the province’s most vulnerable. Dr. Razawa 
Maroof came to Regina in 1996 as a political refugee from Iraq, 
and she worked hard to gain accreditation in Canada so she 
could continue helping others. Dr. Maroof works as a family 
doctor at the Regina Community Clinic, where she specializes 
in working with government-sponsored refugees. 
 
Newcomers can have a hard time communicating with their 
doctors, and doctors may be unsure of how to care for these 
patients. When Dr. Maroof became a professor associated with 
the College of Medicine in 2007, she was determined to educate 
future doctors on how to understand and respect a refugee’s 
culture and religious beliefs. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Over the years, Dr. Maroof has taken note of the challenges her 
patients face gaining access to health care. Language is one of 
the biggest hurdles, especially when accessing mental health 
services. In a recent Leader-Post article, Dr. Maroof explained 
how her patients feel uncomfortable going to mental health 
clinics because they feel judged and there’s no interpreters. At 

conferences, Dr. Maroof has advocated for more training for 
health care workers and for more resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join me in thanking 
Dr. Razawa Maroof for her diligence in caring for some of the 
province’s most vulnerable. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 

New Wellness Centre in Melfort 
 
Mr. Goudy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the years the 
people of this province have shown their ability to create 
made-in-rural-Saskatchewan solutions for rural Saskatchewan 
challenges. In my hometown, people saw a need for some 
health care efficiencies and gathered residents with a can-do 
attitude to build what was needed for a brighter future. Over the 
years we ran into some roadblocks and a few dead ends, but 
today I’m glad to say that the people of my constituency were 
able to watch as their wellness centre was erected and attached 
to our hospital in Melfort. 
 
The ingredients for success were a city council and staff 
working together with the surrounding RMs [rural 
municipality], willing to take on the responsibility and 
leadership in this project; doctors making a sacrifice for the 
good of their patients, accepting a rent increase and relocating 
to their new offices connected to the hospital; and thirdly, 
Avatex, a development company with a heart for Melfort, 
willing to take a risk and invest in what they believe is a good 
town with a bright future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to be a part of a provincial government 
whose guiding principles lay the framework for partnership 
between government, private sector, and the people that they 
serve. That partnership has made a difference for the people I 
represent, Mr. Speaker, and today we have a beautiful and 
efficient facility housing 12 doctors as well as many other 
health services. 
 
On behalf of this entire Assembly, I’d like to thank everyone 
involved in the success of this project. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Saskatoon Promenade Named After Music Icon 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I stand today to celebrate the 
recognition of one of Saskatchewan’s most influential artists 
and renowned musical icons, Joni Mitchell, who will be 
permanently honoured in Saskatoon, the city in which she spent 
some of her most important formative years. On Monday, 
Saskatoon City Council voted unanimously in favour of the Joni 
Mitchell Promenade, naming a stretch of walkway next to 
Spadina Crescent from 2nd Avenue to 3rd Avenue, located in 
my constituency of Saskatoon Centre. This section of walkway 
leads to Saskatoon’s new Remai Modern. In addition, the 
University of Saskatchewan announced it will pay tribute to 
Joni Mitchell with an honorary degree at this year’s spring 
convocation. 
 
While she attained her fame as Joni Mitchell, she was born 
Roberta Joan Anderson in Fort Macleod, Alberta in 1943, 



4154 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2018 

moving with her family to North Battleford after the Second 
World War, then to Saskatoon during the early 1950s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mitchell has won eight Grammys, her first in 1969 
and her most recent in 2015. She was inducted into the Rock 
and Roll Hall of Fame in 1997. Among her most notable songs 
are “Both Sides, Now,” “Big Yellow Taxi,” and “Woodstock.” 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think we all have a favourite album. 
 
I ask all members to join me in recognizing Saskatoon’s own 
Joni Mitchell, and I encourage everyone to visit Saskatoon and 
take a walk on the Joni Mitchell Promenade this summer. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Changes Implemented Prior to Wildfire Season 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 25th, 
the Prince Albert Grand Council released their interim report, 
Fighting Forest Fires in Northern Saskatchewan, on the 
wildfire task force. The task force was launched in January 
2018 to provide an independent review of Saskatchewan’s 
current wildfire management strategies. 
 
The report marks the first step by the council to reform the 
current system prior to the new fire season. The council is 
comprised of First Nation elders, leaders, and technicians from 
across northern Saskatchewan as well as representatives from 
the Federation of Sovereign Indigenous Nations. The report 
states there were 353 wildfires last year with hectares of burnt 
land impacting the treaty rights of the northern First Nations to 
hunt, trap, fish, and gather food. The task force has been 
working closely together to address and implement the needed 
changes to better serve local residents. 
 
The Ministry of Environment has already introduced changes 
for the upcoming wildfire season, including increasing 
emergency firefighter crew size from five to eight, training 
more crew leaders, and enhanced funding for fuel projects. 
Living in that region, I understand the impacts of these wildfires 
on northern communities.  
 
We look forward to continuing the positive working 
relationship with the Prince Albert Grand Council as we protect 
our friends. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

2018 Saskatchewan Regional Park of the Year 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Pasquia Park is being awarded the regional Park of the Year by 
the Saskatchewan Regional Parks Association. I certainly 
understand why this particular park was chosen, as it’s right 
across the road from our farm. 
 
Pasquia Park is host to a beautiful challenging nine-hole golf 
course, and not just challenging for non-golfers such as myself, 
Mr. Speaker. This golf course is one of the nicest in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they also have a top-notch 

minigolf course, which is more to my liking and skill set. 
 
The park also includes an Olympic-size swimming pool, an 
interpretive centre which is home to Big Bert, a prehistoric 
crocodilian that was found close by and should have been 
named Saskatchewan’s official fossil. We was robbed again, 
Mr. Speaker. Along with the many electrified camping sites, 
this beautiful park runs at near capacity all summer. If you 
would like to come and stay at this jewel, book early. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the regional Park of the Year selection process is 
very competitive. While it has been some time since Pasquia 
Park has won the award, they are no doubt very honoured to 
once again be raising the banner for this coming year.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 
Pasquia Park for receiving the 2018 Saskatchewan Regional 
Park of the Year Award. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 

Swimming Coach Selected for  
Special Olympics Summer Games  

 
Mr. Hindley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to 
congratulate Swift Current’s Jackie Powell on being selected as 
the associate swimming coach for Team Canada ahead of the 
2019 Special Olympics World Summer Games. This will be 
Jackie’s fourth opportunity to represent Saskatchewan as well 
as Canada on the international stage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jackie has an absolutely amazing track record. 
She’s been dedicated to the Special Olympics swimming 
program for well over 20 years now. In 2007 she was named the 
Female Coach of the Year by both Special Olympics 
Saskatchewan and also Special Olympics Canada. And in 2015 
she received the Saskatchewan Sport Female Coach Dedication 
Award, and at that time it was noted that her athletes had won 
84 national medals and — get this — 44 world medals as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jackie is a passionate coach and loves being able 
to see her swim team succeed in sport while also adding to their 
quality of life. She once said: 
 

Seeing them have an amazing race makes me speechless, 
and being able to transfer that into their daily lives, having 
them being able to get a job and live independently . . . 
Sport does way more than provide them with an 
opportunity for physical fitness. It’s also a whole life 
opportunity. 

 
You see, Mr. Speaker, Jackie is not only a great swim coach. 
She also works for Partners in Employment in Swift Current, 
doing some great work in our community. Mr. Speaker, we 
need more Jackie Powells in the world. And I’d ask all 
members to join me in congratulating her on being appointed as 
an associate coach and wish all of her athletes the best of luck 
as they prepare for the 2019 Special Olympics World Summer 
Games. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 



May 2, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4155 

Royal Canadian Mounted Police Charity Ball  
Supports Globe Theatre 

 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this past weekend I had the opportunity to attend the 
RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] Charity Ball in 
support of the Globe Theatre School educational development 
fund. 
 
The evening was emceed by Regina-born actress, Amy 
Matysio. It then featured performances by some of the Globe 
Theatre School’s best and brightest, a wonderful meal, live 
music, as well as silent and live auctions offering one-of-a-kind 
items to bid on. 
 
The annual event attracted over 400 from Regina’s community. 
Mr. Speaker, each year the RCMP Depot Division selects a 
charity to host the annual fundraising ball. This year, profits 
received through the RCMP Charity Ball will be allocated to an 
educational development fund which will offset the costs of 
Globe Theatre School programming on an annual basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Globe Theatre School educational 
development fund provides Saskatchewan youth of all abilities 
opportunities to participate in the arts. Some students of the 
Globe Theatre School programs include those with financial, 
cultural, language, and social barriers, as well as those with 
special needs. The development fund will help ensure the Globe 
Theatre can continue to provide these programs throughout our 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 
RCMP Depot Division for their commitment to supporting local 
charities, as well as the whole Globe Theatre organizing 
committee which is headed by Lisa McIntyre, who had a 
fantastic evening and raised money for a wonderful charity. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Domestic Violence Legislation 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the Justice 
minister was asked for his government’s support in passing Bill 
609, The Support for Survivors of Domestic Violence Act this 
session, and he declined to offer that support. And this is the 
fourth time we’ve put forth that bill, Mr. Speaker. Now this 
government has, I must acknowledge, taken some action on this 
issue, and we do commend that. So long as Saskatchewan 
continues to be the province with the highest rates of domestic 
violence in the country, it’s far too early to say that enough has 
been done. 
 
Bill 609 would introduce five days of paid leave for survivors 
of domestic violence, up to 17 weeks of unpaid leave, and 
supports for people with PTSD due to their experiences, Mr. 
Speaker. Ontario and Manitoba already introduced similar 
measures, as has the federal government for their employees. So 
the question is, why is this government dragging their heels 
when we’re the province that’s most in need of these measures? 
Will the Premier commit to passing this legislation this session? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question from 
the Leader of the Opposition and all the opposition members’ 
conversation on what is a very important topic to, I think in 
fairness, all communities and all people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And he is correct. We do need to do more, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And he is correct in acknowledging that there has been work 
done, Mr. Speaker. But not to discount the need for more effort 
on this conversation and action as we move forward, which is 
why we do have a bill in the House here right now, Mr. 
Speaker, about in the middle of a number of provincial bills that 
are being looked at or introduced, Mr. Speaker. And it includes 
such efforts as the breaking of a lease, allowing the breaking of 
a lease for those that are affected, Mr. Speaker, by interpersonal 
violence, as well as 10 days for victims and families to access 
services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, understanding that we have put in place a 
domestic violence review committee, an inter-ministerial 
committee to continue to work on this very, very important file 
to people across the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, it 
is also important to acknowledge that there is a bill in the 
House, and there is work that is ongoing on this file as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Wage Rates and Affordability 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The bill that was 
referenced, which has already passed, is a positive step forward. 
But that really doesn’t answer the question of why this 
government wouldn’t be ready to take those steps that we’re 
already seeing in other parts of the country — very reasonable 
and important steps to support people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, across Canada we’re also seeing workers 
advocating for a $15-an-hour minimum wage. Workers in 
Ontario and Alberta, provinces whose economies happen to be 
actually outperforming ours, will be able to expect that rate very 
soon. However, at the current pace, Saskatchewan workers 
won’t see a $15-an-hour minimum wage until 2035, Mr. 
Speaker. My seven-month-old son will be a high school senior 
by the time the minimum wage is $15 here. 
 
And while wages are rising very slowly, cost of living is rising 
much more quickly, including a 6 per cent increase in restaurant 
meals and children’s clothes because of the PST [provincial 
sales tax] hike from this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people earning minimum wage are falling behind. 
That hurts them. It hurts local businesses because people have 
less money to spend. And it hurts people’s health and their 
quality of life. Is the lowest minimum wage in the nation of 
Canada really something that the Premier is proud of? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, as we said, I think it was two 
days ago in this House and in the rotunda, that the government 
has consulted across the province of Saskatchewan on a formula 



4156 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2018 

for our minimum wage, Mr. Speaker. It’s a formula that has 
been in place now for a number of years. It’s a formula that we 
feel is working for the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And understanding that minimum wage is but one factor in the 
affordability of people here in the province, of this province or 
any province, Mr. Speaker, again we need to take into account 
the fact that it had been this government that has taken action 
over the last decade to take 112,000 people off the provincial 
income tax rolls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many comparisons in this province 
where many of those individuals — and young, single families 
in many cases, Mr. Speaker — are paying little to no income 
tax here in the province of Saskatchewan. And their 
affordability index, Mr. Speaker, is much, much stronger than 
other areas of the nation of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again, more to do, Mr. Speaker, as we move forward to 
ensure that people in this province are receiving the supports 
that they need and have the opportunity to improve their career 
as well, Mr. Speaker, with a strong economy. But through 
multi-measures, Mr. Speaker, including reducing our income 
tax to those people, we’re in a good spot here. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, this government says that having 
the lowest minimum wage in Canada, having a situation where 
people are working full time but still living in poverty is 
somehow, and I quote, “working for the people of the 
province.” 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government likes to present itself as fiscally 
conservative, but low wages result in more working people 
accessing public supports, more people being trapped in 
poverty, the numbers of people on the social assistance rolls 
climbing. The irony of a supposedly conservative government 
boasting about having more people on social assistance is 
astounding, Mr. Speaker. The current low rate, it hurts workers 
and it hurts us all. It’s in no way working for the people of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier commit to doing the right thing 
and the smart thing? Will he raise the minimum wage to a level 
that will help working people get out of poverty? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been doing that for a 
number of years now with a formula that we put forward a few 
years ago, Mr. Speaker, and we continue to follow here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think the member opposite should ensure 
that when he is talking about the affordability of Saskatchewan 
families, Mr. Speaker, and in particular those Saskatchewan 
families that are at the lower income earning levels, he takes 
into account all of the affordability factors, minimum wage 
being but one of them, Mr. Speaker. Because the fact of the 
matter is this, Mr. Speaker: a family of four in this province 

earning with a $50,000 income level is still going to pay $2,300 
less each and every year than they did when members opposite 
were on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a fact. Understanding there is more to do, 
Mr. Speaker, we need to ensure that we have a strong economy 
so that people have every opportunity to expand . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, we also need to ensure that we 
have a strong economy here in the province of Saskatchewan so 
that people, individuals, families across this province, have 
every opportunity to further their career choices, have every 
opportunity to find a better life here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, a better career, Mr. Speaker, and ensure that our 
level of affordability is strong here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Release of Information on the Global Transportation Hub 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the bad news coming out of the 
GTH [Global Transportation Hub] is like the Sask Party’s 
record debt: it just keeps piling up. This of course makes the 
mess even harder to clean up — something the Sask Party has 
failed to understand. 
 
The Sask Party has ignored our calls for transparency. But 
perhaps even more troubling is that they are giving the same 
treatment to Saskatchewan’s Information and Privacy 
Commissioner. And their reason, Mr. Speaker? Negative media 
attention. That’s right. The GTH has cited the potential for 
negative media attention as the reason for dragging its feet for 
almost a year on a series of CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation] access to information requests at the GTH. 
Saskatchewan’s Information and Privacy Commissioner ruled 
last week that this is inappropriate, but the Sask Party is still 
refusing to comply. 
 
To the minister: will he finally start seriously addressing 
concerns at the GTH and follow through on the 
recommendations of the independent Privacy Commissioner 
and release those documents? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I know the member 
opposite purports to know a lot of things that we don’t know on 
this side of the House. One of those might be that the land at the 
GTH was transferred into the name of the Saskatchewan Party. 
I am not aware of that transfer. I’m not aware of the 
Saskatchewan Party having any interest in that piece of 
property. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can say that the GTH is an independent entity. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it responds to the freedom of information 
requests without interference from the government. We don’t 
tell them what to do. We don’t tell them what not to do. 
 



May 2, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4157 

Mr. Speaker, my understanding is the same as everyone else’s, 
that they had some discussions with the Privacy Commissioner 
about what was commercially sensitive and what was not 
commercially sensitive. They want to make sure that they deal 
with everything that is commercially sensitive and they protect 
that information. At the same time, they’ve got to reflect on the 
fact that they are dealing with taxpayer dollars and provide all 
the information that they can. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the negative media coverage is 
one thing, but the negative bank account at the GTH is what the 
Sask Party should be worried about. Now this is a troubling 
pattern that we see. It’s the same MO [modus operandi] the 
Sask Party have used to bury the Husky pipeline inspection 
reports, and we know what the Privacy Commissioner had to 
say about that. 
 
Last fall, the Ministry of Highways won the coveted Code of 
Silence Award for its failure to release documents as requested 
by the commissioner, and of course their steadfast refusal to 
allow Laurie Pushor to answer questions about the GTH land 
scandal. Now what else are they not telling us? Is it widespread 
practice for the Sask Party to withhold information from the 
public that it thinks will lead to negative media attention? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite 
have questions for the Sask Party, I direct them to speak to 
Patrick Bundrock, the executive director of the party. That’s 
where Sask Party questions belong, and I’m sure he will give 
them every appropriate answer that’s there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with regard to the global . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s the intention of this 
government to proceed with the successes that have taken place 
at the Global Transportation Hub. I’ve answered questions here 
in the House before. There is an investment that’s taken place 
from private sector — $485 million. 4,800 trucks move in and 
out of the GTH every week. Of the 1,800 acres that comprise 
the GTH, over 700 acres are sold. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the GTH is a self-governing inland port. It is 
similar to other inland ports in Canada and elsewhere. It 
benefits from a designation as a foreign trade zone. It’s its own 
taxing authority and it maintains autonomy. Mr. Speaker, we 
want to sell more land out there, and we’d appreciate some 
support from the people across. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Provincial Economic Growth 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, new numbers out today show 

that Saskatchewan had the lowest GDP [gross domestic 
product] growth outside of Atlantic Canada for 2017. While BC 
[British Columbia] and Alberta’s economies grew 3.9 and 4.9 
per cent respectively, Saskatchewan lagged behind at 2.9 per 
cent. Construction activity in the province dropped by over 3 
per cent, and so it’s no wonder that people are leaving 
Saskatchewan to find opportunities in other provinces to the 
west. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, things aren’t looking any better for 2018 
with several reports predicting Saskatchewan as one of the 
slowest growing economies. Heck, the Sask Party government’s 
own budget documents show it. So when will they stop the spin, 
realize that we are falling behind our neighbours, and take 
action to make sure Saskatchewan people have opportunities 
here at home? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
reality is that since 2007, the GDP growth in this province has 
been the third highest in the entire country, Mr. Speaker, nearly 
19 per cent growth. The other reality, Mr. Speaker, is RBC 
[Royal Bank of Canada] and a number of other private sector 
forecasters have predicted strong growth in the next year. RBC, 
in fact, predicted that Saskatchewan would lead the country in 
economic growth, and a number of other private sector 
forecasters have the rate of growth at the number two level or 
number three level, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what is also clear is the only economic policy that the 
members opposite have put on the table — that the member for 
Nutana particularly has shown strong support for through her 
support of the Leap Manifesto, Mr. Speaker — has been the 
carbon tax. We know that a carbon tax would have a 
devastating impact on our economy, that it would kill jobs, Mr. 
Speaker, and we find it disappointing that the Leader of the 
Opposition and the member for Nutana have taken a very weak 
position in supporting that carbon tax. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Funding for Capital Infrastructure in the Education Sector 

 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we saw something quite 
unusual here in the Assembly. We saw the Minister for 
Education actually give a straightforward answer to a question. 
When I asked the minister at committee what the breakdown is 
between maintenance and interest on the $13.5 million line in 
the budget for the P3 [public-private partnership] schools, the 
minister said, “We can’t break those numbers out because of the 
proprietary nature of the contract with JUMP. So I can’t break 
that number out for you.” But when my colleague, the member 
for Regina Rosemont, asked the same question yesterday during 
question period, the minister was more than happy to oblige. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what gives? Why were those numbers 
proprietary Monday night but free to share on Tuesday 
afternoon? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 



4158 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2018 

Speaker, I did indicate in committee on Monday night . . . That 
was my answer in committee Monday night, Mr. Speaker. I 
went back and I had a conversation with my officials in the 
Ministry of Education, Mr. Speaker, and through them, 
conversations with officials over at SaskBuilds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The numbers are fairly transparent in the financial statements, 
Mr. Speaker, and so that’s why I stood up in the House 
yesterday and indicated that the answer that I gave, Mr. 
Speaker. And it’s very, very clear, Mr. Speaker. It’s noted in the 
’18-19 Estimates, maintenance and interest was $13.5 million, 
Mr. Speaker. And of that, interest was $8.643 million, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s quite clear on the face of the financial statements, 
Mr. Speaker, and I was very clear yesterday. And I was happy 
to stand up in the House and clear the record. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, during the minister’s momentary 
lapse of transparency, he revealed that the maintenance for the 
P3 schools is pegged at $4.8 million. $4.8 million to maintain 
18 brand new schools works out to $267,000 per school. That’s 
four times what’s budgeted for preventative maintenance for the 
rest of the schools in the province. And in communities like 
Moose Jaw, they’re feeling pressure that the underfunding has 
caused. With leaking roofs and out-of-date buildings, leaders in 
the school division have had to decide whether to spend their 
precious PMR [preventative maintenance and renewal] dollars 
fixing things up or waiting to see if there will be funding for a 
new school. 
 
How can the minister justify spending so much to maintain 
brand new P3 schools when other schools in communities like 
Moose Jaw are crumbling? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, again, the members 
opposite don’t appreciate the nature of the contracts that we’ve 
entered into, Mr. Speaker. These are maintenance contracts, Mr. 
Speaker, that will preserve the integrity and the state of these 
schools over a period of 30 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now for her to stand up and make a comment about PMR, Mr. 
Speaker, a number, by the way, PMR, which didn’t exist when 
the New Democrats were in government, Mr. Speaker. That 
money is there to ensure that school divisions have the 
resources to be able to maintain their buildings, Mr. Speaker. 
For a school division to decide not to use PMR and risk the 
chance of not getting a school built or hopefully getting a 
school built isn’t a very responsible use of the money, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s there to make sure that school divisions can 
maintain their schools, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I want to talk a little 
bit about capital, Mr. Speaker — last year the largest education 
capital infrastructure build in the province’s history, something 
we’re very, very proud of, Mr. Speaker. We’re opening new 
schools, Mr. Speaker. We’re not closing them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, boards are faced with two problems 
wholly caused by this government. PMR funding just isn’t 
adequate to keep up with the repairs needed in our schools, half 
of which are more than 50 years old. And boards have no 
predictability when it comes to funding for these replacement 
schools, and they don’t have resources needed to fix things up. 
And they don’t have a reliable partner in this government to 
support the schools that boards have determined to be their top 
priority. 
 
My question to the minister is this: will he commit to working 
with school boards to develop a transparent, predictable, and 
adequate capital funding model? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve stood on my feet a 
number of times during this session of the legislature to talk 
about my commitment to having conversations with school 
divisions, Mr. Speaker, about what their needs are — not just 
capital needs, but resources in the classroom, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s why you saw $30 million in this year’s budget to help 
support children in the classrooms, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m happy to sit down and continue to have a conversation with 
school boards, Mr. Speaker, about their priority. But the 
member should know — and she should know; she’s a former 
school board trustee — the list of capital priorities, the projects 
that are presented by school boards, have been presented 
forever, Mr. Speaker. And we continue to maintain that list. 
 
We continue to look to see where the needs are within our 
school divisions across the province, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll 
continue to work with school divisions to make sure that 
students have safe places where they can learn, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s our commitment and I’m committed to it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Reliability of Health Care Facilities 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been hearing 
from community members in Moose Jaw about a concerning 
event that took place at the Dr. F.H. Wigmore Hospital summer 
before last. We learned that there was a significant power 
outage that took place the morning of the 16th of June which 
led to a critical incident and disruption in people’s care. 
 
Information obtained through a freedom of information request 
indicates the power was out for a full 45 minutes, and that 
included disrupting power to operating rooms, the intensive 
care unit, and the emergency room. Every minute counts when 
it comes to the type of care provided in these settings. This is a 
brand new hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We recently heard this government point towards the design 
process as the reason pediatric psychiatry was left out of the 
children’s hospital. We know that the Wigmore Hospital was 
designed by the same consultant. What has been done to 
investigate the role that design played in this incident? 
 
[14:15] 
 



May 2, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4159 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, the health system in this 
province is huge — there’s about 45,000 employees; the 
budget’s $5.7 billion, Mr. Speaker. There’s many factors at 
play, many facilities around the province, Mr. Speaker. It’s not 
front of mind to me, the incident that the Leader of the 
Opposition’s speaking of in Moose Jaw. It’s been a couple 
years ago, I understand. 
 
We trust when incidents like that happen around the province 
that officials will deal with them appropriately. If not, they’ll be 
brought to my attention, Mr. Speaker. I will look into that 
matter, Mr. Speaker, just as we will anything. But in the 
meantime, Mr. Speaker, we certainly trust officials to handle 
situations like that. And they do; they handle them 
appropriately. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a critical 
incident that did put at risk the care of patients at the Wigmore 
Hospital, and it’s a bit surprising that the minister isn’t more 
aware of it. Records indicate however that the minister’s office 
didn’t even learn of this issue until they heard about it from the 
public, a full nine months after the incident took place. During 
this outage, surgeries were cancelled, the central monitoring 
system in the ER [emergency room] wasn’t working, and the 
intensive care unit’s bedside and central monitors also were off 
service. 
 
This is no small thing, Mr. Speaker, and it raises the question 
why the minister was not aware of such a critical incident right 
away. The access to information request also indicates that this 
minister’s office has been hearing a number of concerns related 
to the policies and procedures at Moose Jaw’s Wigmore 
Hospital, this incident being just one of four listed by 
ministerial staff. What other significant concerns are being 
raised by the public about this hospital, and what has the 
minister done to address them? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, in this House I want to thank 
the two members that we have from Moose Jaw that represent 
that community, represent that community very well, Mr. 
Speaker. That is the reason that we have a new hospital in 
Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s this government that has taken — in what was 
a very tight budget this year — a health budget up to $5.77 
billion, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of the province. 
This is a service the people of this province expect, Mr. 
Speaker. A two and a half per cent increase in what was a very 
challenging budget year, Mr. Speaker. That’s up 56 per cent 
since the members opposite were in power, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It includes the investment, in addition to that, in 15 long-term 
care facilities across rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It 
includes that Dr. F.H. Wigmore Hospital in the community of 
Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, which was asked for by the people 
represented by their MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] within this government, and the funding was 

provided, Mr. Speaker. It includes an additional $235 million 
for the Jimmy Pattison Children’s Hospital in Saskatoon and an 
over 100-year facility in the community of North Battleford, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re proud of our record on health care in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There was a lot of 
volume in that answer, but not a great deal of content. I heard 
nothing that would address the very real concerns that the 
design consultant that built the Wigmore Hospital has also 
designed the children’s hospital — are there any concerns 
there? — and we identified four concerns raised by the 
ministry’s own staff about Wigmore Hospital. Will the Premier 
or the minister step forward and address what those concerns 
are and what is being done to make sure that that facility is able 
to operate safely and deliver the care that patients need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, first of all to the member’s 
point on the incident that happened, the issues have been fixed, 
Mr. Speaker. Officials took the appropriate course of action. 
They fixed it two years ago, Mr. Speaker. Just like many things, 
the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] behind the times. 
 
But let’s make it perfectly clear what the NDP are doing in 
these instances, Mr. Speaker. They’re fearmongering. They’re 
doing it in this case because they didn’t get a hospital built 
there, so they’re fearmongering just like they did with the 
Jimmy Pattison Children’s Hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last week in the media, the critic, the leader, Mr. Speaker, what 
did they do? They throw fear out into the community. They 
won’t be able to recruit enough pediatricians, Mr. Speaker — 
wrong. It’s not the case, Mr. Speaker. It won’t be opened on 
time — wrong, Mr. Speaker. They’re doing that all the time. 
It’s fearmongering. It’s pure politics. 
 
The recruitment’s going on. Dr. Givelichian is doing a 
tremendous job of it, Mr. Speaker, certainly much better than 
the members opposite do in the media, Mr. Speaker. It’s going 
to get built. It’s going to be on time. The issues at Moose Jaw 
have been rectified. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. Sorry. I recognize the member 
for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 

Pilot Training Program 
 
Ms. Mowat: — For generations, men and women at 15 Wing 
Moose Jaw have served our country and trained some of the 
best pilots in the world. Saskatchewan people are proud of this 
tradition of pilot training that goes all the way back to the 
Second World War. However, the federal government is 
looking to consolidate pilot training across Canada. 
 
Although it seems that the Southport pilot training program in 
Manitoba is the main target for closure, the federal government 
has offered no clarity about the future of the Moose Jaw 
program. 15 Wing employs hundreds of military and civilian 
personnel, and these people help drive the economy in Moose 



4160 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2018 

Jaw and here in Regina. 
 
Is the Sask Party government engaged on this file? What are 
they doing to ensure that the air force pilot training program 
will continue at 15 Wing Moose Jaw? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this is a question 
that would be much better put to the federal Minister of 
National Defence, Mr. Speaker. But what I can say is that there 
is a long tradition in this province of pilot training going back to 
the Commonwealth Air Training program, Mr. Speaker. Tens of 
thousands of young men and women who have served not just 
our country, but served allied countries around the world, have 
received their flight training in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re hopeful that’ll continue. 
 
I actually spoke with one of the senior executives for CAE just 
yesterday about an exciting announcement that they had made 
with regard to an application for a joint venture to continue 
training pilots here in Saskatchewan. We’ve put on the record 
our support for that, and whatever engagement that would be 
helpful in moving that forward, we’re happy to participate in, 
Mr. Speaker. So yes, we have been engaged. 
 
If the member wishes to put the specific question she did, it 
would be better put to the Minister of National Defence. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 240 and 241. 
 
The Speaker: — Tabled 240, 241. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 81 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 81 — The 
Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
Yes, sorry. Sorry for the mike. 
 
Ms. Beck: — That’s okay. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise this afternoon to enter into second reading 
debate on Bill No. 81, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill came before us, I believe back in 
November 7th of 2017, by the minister, Minister Hargrave, 
Minister of SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] rather, 

Mr. Speaker, and it proposes a number of changes. One of the 
first changes that is proposed here is that a driver with a blood 
alcohol content of higher than .04 who transports children under 
the age of 16 will face longer licence suspensions and longer 
vehicle seizures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is one of a number of bills that we’ve seen in 
regard to drunk driving and impaired driving in our province 
and is certainly something that deserves our attention and action 
on behalf of the government. Of course people of this province 
are all too familiar with stories in the news with traffic fatalities 
and injuries caused by impaired driving, and that is something 
that simply cannot be let stand. So looking at measures for 
increased penalties for those who choose to drive while 
impaired certainly has support on both sides of the aisle in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And those who willingly transport 
children under 16 while drinking, I think that there is, again 
there is support on both sides of the aisles here. 
 
One thing I would like to point out, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that 
it’s not only children in the vehicle who are at risk when people 
get in the vehicle and choose to drive. It’s children in other 
vehicles and children who are pedestrians. And unfortunately 
one doesn’t have to look too far back in media coverage and 
news releases, news coverage in this province, to find instances 
where people who perhaps don’t have children in their own car 
head out onto the highway and cause horrific injuries and even 
fatalities to others, including children. And that is something 
that I think is worth considering as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that there were members on this side of the House who a 
number of years ago sat on a committee looking at the rates of 
drinking and driving and some of the measures. I think 
specifically of the member for Riversdale and the member for 
Cumberland and the other members of that committee, and I 
thank them for that time on the committee. I think at that point a 
number of the measures that we are starting to see come 
forward here were discussed. Witnesses were brought to that 
committee. And I guess it is perhaps . . . would have been good 
to see some of these measures earlier, but if we’re seeing them 
now and they will be beneficial, I think that that benefits all 
people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Another change that is being proposed with this bill is the 
looking-back period or the period that’s taken into account with 
regard to repeated offences, is being doubled from 5 years to 10 
years, Mr. Speaker. And of course I think there would be some 
support for that, that this is a very serious offence, and 
unfortunately many of those who are convicted are convicted 
several times. So we’ll have an opportunity to ask how that time 
period was arrived at when we take this to committee. 
 
There’s also a change that allows law enforcement to offer an 
indefinite administration suspension, making roadside 
consequences for those charged with impaired driving under the 
Criminal Code consistent with those charged with exceeding 
the .08, the criminal rate of impairment, or for those who refuse 
to comply with the demand for a test, Mr. Speaker. This is 
something that I’m sure we’ve all heard a tale of someone 
who’s been pulled over for suspected impaired driving and 
refusing to stick around or to offer a test, an impaired driving 
test. So that is something I’d be interested again, as always, as 
to who has suggested these changes and what background 



May 2, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4161 

research has been done in terms of the efficacy of some of these 
changes. 
 
There are a few different items that are put forward in this bill. 
The first several, as I’ve mentioned, deal with drinking and 
driving. There is also a provision for requiring vehicles to slow 
down to 60 when snowplows are stopped at the side of the road 
and when passing other vehicles providing assistance, if the 
prescribed lights are in operation. Of course members of this 
Assembly will remember there have been some changes with 
regard to snowplows and the use of blue lights on plows and on 
towing vehicles. So I think that there is some consistency that’s 
proposed there. I’m not sure why that didn’t happen when that 
bill was brought in, but it’s happening now. 
 
I guess the most contentious piece of this bill, Mr. Speaker — 
and something that we’ve been hearing about on this side, and 
I’m sure that members opposite have been hearing about too — 
is with regard to operation authority certificates. So of course, 
Mr. Speaker, this change comes in the wake of the shutdown, 
the windup or wind-down of STC [Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company]. This was our provincial carrier, 
provided safe transportation for people around the province — 
regulated, predictable, safe transportation for those who perhaps 
had no other option or perhaps who just preferred that option to 
be able to move people and services around the province. Of 
course STC is no longer. 
 
[14:30] 
 
There was a period where we were told that private operators 
would take up that business and would ensure that there would 
be transportation for all, Mr. Speaker, but that certainly isn’t 
what we’ve seen. We’ve seen this process, in this period in 
between, marked by unpredictability. Companies starting up; 
companies shutting down. Routes being unpredictable, seeing 
pick-up points being somewhat less than predictable. And now 
we’re seeing a deregulation of the operation of those bus lines. 
 
There is a proposition with this bill to repeal, I think from 
section 88 all the way to 95, so a whole section of the existing 
Traffic Safety Act that applies to operation authority certificates; 
applies to rules respecting carriers; applies to rates charged by 
holders of the operating authority; applies to rules of tickets; the 
operation of buses and trucks; the operation prohibiting the 
transfer of certificates; how the books are to be maintained; the 
supervision of those who hold the certificates; and production, 
falsification of certificates, which I suppose seems reasonable; 
and the review of certificates, Mr. Speaker, as well as how the 
orders are enforced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a whole section of the Act that looked at 
rates, background checks, and really I would suspect were put 
in place to ensure safety of these carriers. You can imagine 
when you buy your ticket on any carrier that there’s a certain 
amount of trust that is placed in the hands of that company and 
that driver. And we want to ensure that there’s proper 
regulation, proper training, proper inspection of the vehicles. 
 
And certainly I, maybe as some other members have, I’ve put 
my children on the bus, actually sent them down to Carnduff 
when we still had STC to visit their cousins and their aunt and 
uncle. And you know, I knew that it was regulated and knew 

that they would be safe as they made the trip down there. And 
there was a lot of trust I placed in STC and in the driver. 
 
You know, part of the reason is that, you know, this is a 
well-regulated, well-run company. And, Mr. Speaker, when 
we’re looking at deregulation of a whole industry like this, I 
first of all would have to ask who was requesting this change, 
and what the expected outcomes, and what some of the 
reasonably to-be-expected outcomes might be of that 
deregulation. 
 
And I know that those are questions that I will get a chance to 
talk further with stakeholders about, and look into what it is that 
other jurisdictions in the country do with regard to regulation of 
these services. Any time we’re contemplating a change such as 
this, I think it does deserve our attention, and that’s what we 
intend to do when we get some time with this bill once it goes 
to committee. I think with that I will conclude my remarks. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
of the minister that Bill No. 81, The Traffic Safety 
(Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time. Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 81, The Traffic 
Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to 
the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 83 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 83 — The 
Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and as 
always it’s an honour to be able to rise in the Assembly here 
today and speak to the government’s agenda and the bills that 
they’ve introduced over the last part of the last year. So I’m 
happy to rise today to speak about changes to The 
Environmental Management and Protection Act. 
 
It’s a bit strange to be in this space today, Mr. Speaker, because 



4162 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2018 

for six years I have been the official opposition’s critic for the 
Environment, and with the rejig of duties it’s now passed on to 
my able colleague from Saskatoon Centre. But I’m looking 
forward to the opportunity to comment on this bill and just want 
to reflect a little bit on some of my experiences as Environment 
critic over the past few years, and perhaps what we don’t see in 
this bill as much as what we do see in this bill. 
 
One of the things that the Sask Party promised if they formed 
government was that they would reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions by 20 per cent of 2005 levels by 2020. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I went through I think four or five different 
Environment ministers when I . . . Some were recycled in and 
out but a number of them I asked in estimates every year 
whether or not that was still the intended target of the Sask 
Party government. 
 
And the ministers always assured me that, although they would 
call it an ambitious target, they were still very confident that 
this was something that would be reached. And that was, 
obviously, the member from Willowgrove and the member 
from Estevan, the member from Battleford, the member from 
Shellbrook who’s now the Premier, Mr. Speaker. They all have 
assured me on various occasions in the annual estimates that 
those targets that were promised by the Sask Party when they 
wanted to form government were ones that were still intended 
to be achieved. Now we’re at 2018, Mr. Speaker. We’re two 
years away from that time frame and emissions have not gone 
down, Mr. Speaker; in fact they have gone up in that time 
frame. 
 
So it’s a bit frustrating I think for the people of Saskatchewan to 
see governments making these types of promises and 
assurances to the people of Saskatchewan that they’re going to 
take the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions seriously. And 
as you know, Mr. Speaker, that’s the single most dangerous 
environmental problem this world is facing today, is the 
proliferation of greenhouse gas emissions and the causation of 
warming of our climate or, as some people describe it, climate 
chaos. 
 
So the problem with making those promises and not acting on 
them is it has basically lulled I think the population of 
Saskatchewan to think that this was being looked after, that 
things were being looked after, that there was no worries, no 
worries at all that there’d be any problems with reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions, and that this government had it 
under control, Mr. Speaker. But we see actually things going in 
the opposite direction. And I know my colleague’s going to 
have a number of questions for the minister when we get into 
estimates because part of what we see going in the opposite 
direction is actual funding for climate change initiatives for the 
people of Saskatchewan to be incented and engaged in their 
own efforts to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
This bill talks a lot about the much vaunted Environmental 
Code that was introduced when this government became . . . 
when the Sask Party formed government. It was brought in I 
think around 2010 and then various chapters have been enacted. 
But you know what chapter has never been enacted, Mr. 
Speaker? The chapter on greenhouse gases, never been enacted. 
It’s still a big, empty, gaping hole in the Environmental Code 
that this government has bragged about for many, many years 

now. 
 
And I think that’s something we’re going to be held 
accountable for when history looks back on how this 
government managed this immense challenge. And it’s not a 
simple challenge, Mr. Speaker; it’s an immense challenge. It’s 
one that engages the entire climate. We saw promises and 
hundreds of countries signing on to the Paris Agreement back a 
few years ago when Premier Wall was in attendance with the 
minister of the day. That was the world coming together 
basically and agreeing that this is a serious issue and that 
changes have to be made. Canada has made very serious 
commitments under that Paris Agreement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there is only one country that has pulled out of that 
agreement since it was enacted. I think you can guess, Mr. 
Speaker, which country that is. It’s our neighbours to the south 
under their new leadership. But there are states in the United 
States and there are cities in the United States that are 
continuing to work towards their agreed decreases in emissions, 
greenhouse gas emissions, so that we will see a shift in the 
damage that’s being created here on the planet. 
 
We talk a lot . . . I saw a sign driving into Regina last night and 
it struck me as interesting. It’s a public announcement saying 
turn in poachers and turn in polluters, Mr. Speaker. So we talk 
about pollution a lot when we talk about water. And we talk 
about pollution a lot when we talk about land. We talk about 
pollution a lot when we talk about air quality. 
 
But we don’t talk about pollution when it comes to greenhouse 
gas emissions, and yet that’s the single largest polluter in the 
planet today. It’s changing the way the oceans’ currents run. It’s 
changing the way the ice caps are operating. It’s changing the 
tundra in the North. It’s changing sea levels, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
changing weather. All of these things are very, very serious. 
 
And if we get to 2 degrees warming, global warming, Mr. 
Speaker, there is going to be a lot of serious problems for not 
only the planet, but for our own race because I think we’re 
going to see displacements of populations like this world has 
never seen before. 
 
So when we have a government that promises repeatedly year 
after year after year that this target of reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions 20 per cent by 2020 from 2005 levels, and no 
progress being made, it’s cause for alarm. 
 
And I’m embarrassed sometimes of what my children and their 
children are going to say about our inability today to make 
significant changes in the way we use fossil fuels. And I think 
it’s something that’s going to be a terrible legacy of this day 
and age, and not just this government, Mr. Speaker, but our 
entire planet. And it’s frustrating as heck. 
 
And I just think it’s unfortunate we don’t see that code in this 
chapter. We don’t see a government moving forward. We see it 
in other . . . Other parts of the world are taking this very 
seriously, Mr. Speaker. They’re being innovative in the way 
they deal with it. They are using the green economy to generate 
new and exciting technologies. 
 
And we see bits and pieces of it here in Saskatchewan by . . . 



May 2, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4163 

For example, Brandt Industries has opened up a new plant in 
northern Saskatoon but they’re being overlooked for contracts, 
Mr. Speaker, because companies from outside of the province 
have been further ahead in developing their industries on things 
like wind towers and wind turbines, Mr. Speaker. We’ve lost 
that opportunity here. We had lots of time to get on that and be 
a significant player in that value-added industry, but we have 
missed the boat. 
 
The Conference Board of Canada said back in 2010 or 2011, 
they did a review of the Sask Party’s bill on The Management 
and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act. Now I don’t know if 
you remember that bill, Mr. Speaker. You and I were elected 
after it was passed. It was actually passed in this House, 
received third reading and Royal Assent, but it’s never been put 
in force, Mr. Speaker, until very recently some chapters . . . 
And the Minister of the Environment’s correct to remind me. 
Well and I am aware of it actually, that partial implementation 
of that bill has finally happened because of this government’s 
work with the federal government on the coal regulations that 
were introduced a few years ago and the need for an 
equivalency agreement, Mr. Speaker. So those chapters were 
absolutely necessary for this government to meet its obligations 
on the coal emissions side. 
 
Now there are other parts in that bill though that I think are 
worthwhile, and we’ve been calling on the government to 
implement them — things like the Climate Change Foundation. 
Climate Change Foundation is one of those things that the 
member for Martensville was actually the minister responsible 
for introducing that bill, Mr. Speaker, and she didn’t see it 
through, Mr. Speaker. There was the Climate Change 
Foundation, the technology foundation, all of those innovative 
ways for people to innovatively bring forward some interesting 
ways to reduce emissions. And that’s what it’s all about, Mr. 
Speaker, is ways to reduce emissions. 
 
There were a lot of good things in that bill, Mr. Speaker, and 
unfortunately this government continues to refuse to implement 
the whole bill. And I’m not sure why they’re so stubborn in not 
implementing that bill, Mr. Speaker, but it’s something that 
could have made a difference in this province. And now we’re 
faced with imposition by the federal government of forming a 
bill, or I guess it was introduced as a bill in the federal House, 
imposing on us something when we could have been so much 
further ahead of the game. And, Mr. Speaker, this government 
has dropped the ball and only being dragged kicking and 
screaming to implement some parts of that bill, but still large 
portions of it are not in effect yet. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And the ones that were promised in December, we haven’t seen 
any legislation yet bringing those high emitters into compliance 
and actually start looking at ways for them to lower their 
emissions or pay a price, Mr. Speaker. And that regulatory 
approach is one that makes a lot of sense. So it’s been 
disappointing, Mr. Speaker, and I think, you know, not only 
will this government be judged by today’s standards, but I think 
in the future your grandchildren, my grandchildren, and the 
generations that follow are going to say, why didn’t this 
happen? We knew it was happening and yet we didn’t take 
action. 

The bill itself deals with a number of amendments to The 
Environmental Management and Protection Act, and again a lot 
of it is in reference to some of the code chapters that were 
introduced by this government as an overhaul to the regulatory 
approach that had been used in years past, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
several I would say housekeeping changes or changes that have 
been introduced because of requests by various stakeholders in 
the environmental management process. 
 
So one of the things they’re talking about in this bill is the 
Environmental Code advisory committee. One of the things that 
was created as another layer of administration as this code was 
brought in is a Saskatchewan Environmental Code advisory 
committee. 
 
In the current bill, Mr. Speaker, they are required to be 
appointed by order in council so there has to be an executive 
government action in order for these people to be appointed. 
This is being devolved now down to the minister where the 
minister will be allowed to appoint these new members to the 
code without any order in council. 
 
As always the concern when you devolve authorities, Mr. 
Speaker, is there’s less accountability, and I think that’s 
something that we’re always concerned about. But the 
administrative ease is always of course something of interest to 
administrators as well, and having to just have the minister 
appoint them by order rather than going through an order in 
council does provide some flexibility for the ministry. And I 
can see why that’s attractive to the minister. 
 
There’s referencing adverse impacts from water supplied by 
waterworks, Mr. Speaker. That is some of the changes that is 
being made, and I’ll just look at the minister’s comments on 
that part of it: “The code is . . . improving processes and 
removing red tape . . . [so] turnaround times . . . for water and 
sewage mains have been reduced from several weeks to one 
day.” 
 
And they’re moving forward with new code chapters, so the 
amendment is going to improve, according to the minister: 
“These amendments will strengthen this group’s ability to carry 
out this important work for the province.” 
 
I am concerned about some of the devolution of provision of 
safe drinking water to communities in and around Saskatoon in 
particular because what’s happened, Mr. Speaker, is a lot of 
that’s been privatized and they’re now private companies that 
are providing potable drinking water to some of the 
subdivisions in the rural parts near Saskatoon. 
 
But what’s happened is that there’s no accountability for these 
companies and there’s no oversight on the part of Water 
Security Agency to ensure that the residents are being delivered 
adequate and safe potable water to their homes and their 
residences. 
 
And I’m working with one individual who’s having a really 
difficult time getting adequate potable water and safe potable 
water. And the company that’s delivering it is not being, despite 
several attempts to have them looked into, Mr. Speaker, it 
simply is not happening. So the frustrations that this individual 
is experiencing and the concern that an entire subdivision could 



4164 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2018 

be at risk because of dangerous water, dangerous drinking water 
or inadequate supplies of water is one I think that is not being 
looked at properly. And I certainly want to have some further 
questions about that when Water Security Agency will be in 
estimates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s other amendments being brought in to deal with 
out-of-province beverage containers that are brought into 
Saskatchewan to take advantage of our recycling program. Mr. 
Speaker, as you know, whenever you bring products to Sarcan 
— I did that last week; I was able to get some recycling in — 
you have to sign your name and provide a phone number to 
demonstrate that you do, and you say, you live in the province 
of Saskatchewan. Now evidently that is not enough, Mr. 
Speaker, and I feel the government is now compelled to 
introduce some new provisions there. 
 
And I’m just going to take a quick look to see if we can look at 
those clauses, Mr. Speaker, in terms of how those changes are 
going to unfold. And I think it’s under a new section being 
added. It’s called 45.1, the interim product stewardship 
program. And it seems to be imposing some requirements on 
manufacturers who import or sell products, that they’re putting 
an interim product stewardship program on it. I’m not 
absolutely sure if that’s the right section, Mr. Speaker, but that 
is one of the things that the minister had talked about in his 
comments on the second reading speech in November. 
 
He went on to say, “The amendments will provide new 
enforcement tools for cross-border beverage containers . . .” So 
that is actually a different section, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
cross-border beverage containers. And I’m going to see if I can 
quickly find it. Unfortunately I can’t locate that clause exactly, 
Mr. Speaker, but I’m sure it’s there. If the minister said it’s 
there, it’s there. So it’s just not jumping out of the page at me. 
 
He did also talk about the waste stewardship programs where 
the public interest is threatened by the imminent discontinuation 
of the stewardship program. So in that case, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the government is inserting some clauses that will 
allow the government to take over if a stewardship program is 
failing. And I don’t know exactly what specific programs the 
government’s concerned about. This information wasn’t 
provided in the second reading speech. But any time the 
government creates a clause to take back power, you have to be 
pretty sure that there are some problems that are being 
addressed here. So again that’s something that my colleague 
will be able to look at once he’s in committee on this bill. 
 
There’s another part in the bill that will clarify language in 
several sections of the Act. The minister advised that: 
 

. . . in regards to . . . drinking water advisories, the Act 
includes a reference to the environment with respect to 
causing an adverse effect but does not reference human 
health. Drinking water is now tied directly to potential 
harm to human health. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, the human health impacts with drinking water 
is something I think we’ve seen examples of all too often. 
You’ll recall the cryptosporidium outbreak in the North 
Battleford water system. And Walkerton of course in Ontario, 
where several people lost their lives, is another example of the 

adverse impact that non-safe drinking water can have on human 
populations, Mr. Speaker. So obviously we want to make sure 
that the adverse impact is tied to human health. That’s an 
important part. 
 
And it brings to mind of course the Husky oil spill of last 
summer, or not last . . . 2017, 2016 already, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
coming up two years now on the Husky oil spill and the public 
still hasn’t been able to see any inspection reports in relation to 
what happened there, why that spill happened, whether the 
response time was adequate, whether the company properly . . . 
or improperly, or how they improperly responded to the alarm 
systems and the warning signs that there was something 
seriously wrong. 
 
And we see the result, Mr. Speaker, when . . . I forget how 
many thousands of litres of oil was dumped into the North 
Saskatchewan River, and it affecting water supplies for the 
people of North Battleford, and also First Nations who use the 
North Saskatchewan River, and of course the city of Prince 
Albert. 
 
But for the quick thinking and quick acting of a lot of city 
officials and environment officials once the spill was 
discovered and reported, people were able to get back to a 
drinking water system. Not without cost of course, which the 
company has been responsible for, the expenses that it caused. 
But there’s still questions remaining about sediment, Mr. 
Speaker, what kind of particulates are embedded in the 
sediment, Mr. Speaker, and what we can do in the future. 
 
We know now that there are a number of pipelines in 
Saskatchewan that actually go underneath water crossings, and I 
think those need to be much more adequately reviewed and 
protected. And again when we’re talking about adverse impacts 
on human health, I think when we privatize delivery, water 
utility delivery, so we’re privatizing our water utilities basically 
is what’s happening, in those small subdivisions that are 
cropping on the outskirts of the cities. 
 
So again, human health . . . You know the damages that can 
happen when there’s E. coli in the water system or any other 
kind of breach of security. And if we’re not able to have the 
Water Security Agency make sure that our water is secure, I 
think this is something that needs to be carefully looked at, and 
whether or not water security is adequately staffed in order to 
have the people available for that oversight. 
 
And again, I guess you can look at things like . . . Water 
Security Agency announced a moratorium on drainage in the 
Quill lakes area, which is a very, very large area, that basin in 
north central Saskatchewan, or central Saskatchewan I guess, 
and yet drainage has continued unabated. And I’ve seen 
examples of that in the Wadena area, Mr. Speaker, where I’ve 
seen track hoes and I’ve seen drainage that clearly happened 
after the moratorium that the Water Security Agency 
announced. 
 
So it’s one thing to announce a moratorium, but the other thing 
is to ensure that producers take that seriously. And when I see 
the disregard that I saw with my own eyes in terms of that 
blatant disregard for the law, Mr. Speaker, you have to wonder 
sometimes whether turning a blind eye to this is appropriate or 



May 2, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4165 

not. Or why bother announcing a moratorium in the first place, 
because it’s being abused. It’s being disregarded. It’s being 
disrespected, and blatantly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think it’s something that should be of concern to this 
government, but unfortunately the attention is not being paid. 
And when you see your neighbour doing something like that 
and the water ends up on your land, what are you going to do, 
Mr. Speaker? What are you going to do? You’re probably going 
to take care of your own, because certainly nobody else is 
looking out for you. 
 
So that leads to all kinds of problems, not just neighbour to 
neighbour. And I’m sure you’ve seen this in your own area, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s not just neighbour to neighbour. All of a sudden it 
becomes RM to RM and then it becomes watershed to 
watershed and then it becomes province to province. And you 
know which way water goes, what direction it goes, Mr. 
Speaker. It goes downhill. And that’s one of the biggest 
problems that we have with the management of water. I think 
it’s something that has been frustrating for producers, especially 
those on the downside of the water systems. This isn’t an easy 
problem, Mr. Speaker. This problem has been around for a long 
time, and I think it’s something that we really need to find 
better ways. 
 
I know that watershed associations are doing what they can do, 
and we’re hoping that that’s going to be more fruitful. And they 
are taking it seriously. They want to make sure they find a 
solution that works, not just for their own individual situation 
but for their community and for their neighbours, 
neighbourhood. I’d think it’d be really an important way for 
farmers to do that. 
 
There are other different changes in the Act. There’s some 
regarding waste abandonment and changes to the wording there, 
and also clarifying language for audits, inspections, and 
investigations to ensure environment officers have appropriate 
powers to carry out their duties. And finally, a further 
amendment for a person to request that information of any kind 
or nature that may reveal proprietary business or trade secret 
information be kept confidential beyond the original five-year 
time period. 
 
[15:00] 
 
It’s a bit frustrating, Mr. Speaker, when we see today a minister 
that’s trying to keep information from committee because of a 
proprietary nature and then realizing it’s not that proprietary. So 
I think that’s something we have to be really careful about when 
we are protecting something that is deemed to be proprietary. I 
think we need a better review of that. Because I’ve had so many 
FOI [freedom of information] requests looking for information 
from this government and not getting that information back, 
because the ministry has determined that it’s proprietary in 
nature. 
 
When you’re doing business with the government, Mr. Speaker, 
I think we need a lot more transparency. And that’s one of the 
biggest issues with P3s, Mr. Speaker, is the inability . . . In the 
past we would be able to see those records. We’d be able to see 
those accounts. We’d be able to understand how the money’s 
being spent. We’re not seeing that now, Mr. Speaker. So these 

kinds of changes I think come with a risk to transparency and 
accountability, and I think that needs to be kept into 
consideration. 
 
So there’s other changes to waterworks and sewage mains and 
housekeeping amendments to make sure the Act is responsive. 
Our Environment critic is going to take a close look at all of this 
once we get the bill into committee, and he can ask those direct 
questions of the minister. 
 
So I think at this point I don’t have much more to add to the 
discussion on the bill today, and so I think I’ll just close my 
comments. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Environment that Bill No. 83 be 
now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 83, The 
Environmental Management and Protection Act, 2017 be 
committed to the Standing Committee on Economy. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Bill 83 stands committed to the 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 88 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 88 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to rise again this afternoon to enter into debate on Bill 
No. 88, The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act. A 
nice bit of alliteration there. And a bill, of course, as the title 
suggests, that proposes amendments to the automobile 
insurance Act. 
 
I’ll just go over some of the highlights or the main measures 
that are contemplated in this bill. The first is to take the 
definition of a chargeable incident and move it into the 
regulations. I believe in his second reading comments, the 
minister noted that this was to correct an unnecessary 
duplication of that definition so that it would be more easily 



4166 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2018 

changed in the regulations and perhaps be more nimble. 
 
Another change that is contemplated here is changes to the 
appeals for driver safety ratings, that again we see movement 
from the Act into the regulations of the procedures, fees, and 
required documents — all being moved from legislation into the 
regulations. Of course it always bears repeating I think, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that any time that when looking at changing, 
moving sections of Acts from legislation into the regulations, 
that we do lose a piece of oversight. 
 
Of course when something needs to be changed in legislation, 
we stand up and we get a number of hours of debate and 
oversight, and that is not afforded when items are moved into 
regulations. So always something to pay attention to, and I 
suppose in some instances it does make sense to be more 
responsive and have things moved into the regulations. But I 
think as we get our last chance here to have a look at those 
pieces in legislation, it is incumbent upon us to make sure that 
we do our due diligence and ensure that we’ve got it right. 
 
There’s also a new section in this bill that clarifies the insurer 
has the right to recovered money paid to an injured customer — 
those who have purchased insurance — or a family member of 
a deceased customer from an insured person who is convicted 
of the Criminal Code offence. Of course these are terrible 
circumstances, when you have an injury or unfortunately the 
death of a loved one, and this allows for some recovery of 
damages from that person who was found to be convicted of a 
Criminal Code offence in the accident. So I would be interested 
and will be interested as this moves into committee just to see 
where we’re at with regard to other jurisdictions and how that 
impacts the insurance system here in the province. 
 
Another thing that is being introduced here is it allows for 
insurers to collect debts that are owed in instalments. Of course, 
that makes some of that debt I suppose more affordable for 
those who are looking to pay back an amount. Perhaps it allows 
people to maintain their coverage, which is important, Mr. 
Speaker. And hopefully, potentially . . . I’d be interested to look 
and see if there’s any evidence that it decreases the amount of 
folks who would be operating without insurance, which is of 
course something that no one wants to see. So ensuring that you 
have coverage for as many people as possible is something that 
I think is a pretty important outcome. 
 
Just looking back to the minister’s comments, going all the way 
back to November the 8th of 2017 on second reading, again 
going back to the chargeable incident. The minister stated that 
the proposed change would eliminate “. . . unnecessary 
duplication and will be more efficient when changes are 
required to the listed offences.” I’m not sure if there is a certain 
addition of an offence, or a list of the type of offences that 
would be listed, but those are some of the questions that we 
would be looking at in committee. 
 
I think that this Act is fairly straightforward. There is a little 
more input that we’d seek from the minister and his officials 
with regard to this bill, but I think I’ll have opportunity to do 
that in committee. And with that I will conclude my remarks. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
a motion by the Minister of Crown Investments corporation that 
Bill No. 88, The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment 
Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 88, The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 be 
committed to the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 
Agencies. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill is referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 112 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 112 — The 
Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis 
Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll just read 
again the title of this bill, Bill No. 112. It’s my pleasure to rise 
and enter into second reading debate on this bill, of course as 
has been mentioned, the miscellaneous vehicle and driving 
statutes amendment Act, 2017. 
 
Of course we’ll all know in this country that we’re seeing a big 
change at the federal level with regard to the decriminalization 
of cannabis, and that has necessitated a number of areas of 
provincial authority to enact legislation to deal with that 
changed world come sometime this summer, Mr. Speaker. And 
when I talk as the SGI critic, there is a fair amount of concern 
and a fair amount of questions about how we are going to deal 
with impaired by cannabis driving in the province. And I think 
obviously this is a very, very important piece of legislation. But 
there are some questions about how we arrived at these 
particular propositions here in this bill. 
 
I’ll just go over briefly what is proposed here. The bill adds new 
federal drug offences under the Criminal Code to various 
sections of the existing automobile insurance Act, as well as to 
The Traffic Safety Act. So this is a whole new world, of course, 
in Canada. And other provinces are grappling with this as well, 
as you know, how to deal with impairment under the changed 
federal legislation. 
 
It adds a definition for drug to The Traffic Safety Act, and it 



May 2, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4167 

adds a new section to The Traffic Safety Act that outlines zero 
tolerance for drug provisions. It sets out licence suspensions, 
vehicle impoundments, and administrative fines for drivers who 
have been found to drive while having consumed drugs. 
 
One of the biggest issues — and I don’t think that this is much 
of a surprise — is just how that’s going to be tested. Of course 
we have, over the years, developed tools for detecting 
impairment by alcohol by drivers. We have roadside tests. We 
have blood tests. There’s some behavioural tests. But I’m not 
sure that we have reached that same level, and in fact I don’t 
think that we have reached that same level with regard to 
impairment by cannabis. 
 
Just in terms of the properties of alcohol and the properties of 
cannabis, cannabis is fat soluble, which means that it stays in 
the body longer than alcohol which is largely flushed through 
the system in fairly quick order. Which does lead to some 
questions, I guess, about exactly what that test is going to look 
like, what the period is in terms of having consumed cannabis, 
and how that’s going to be enforced in terms of training and 
detection at the roadside. So I think that will be an area that 
we’ll spend some time on in committee. 
 
There’s a note that drug offences will be dealt with in the same 
way as alcohol-related offences, except that ignition interlock 
can’t be used to deal with the consumption of drugs, which I 
suppose does make sense. And I would be interested in what 
other devices, technology is available to deal with issues 
specifically of consumption of drugs. 
 
Currently it’s illegal to drive while impaired, whether that is 
from alcohol or drugs, and that remains the same, Mr. Speaker, 
as it should. I think we all can agree that we don’t want drivers 
who are impaired out on the roadways and negatively impacting 
both their own health but of course of those who are on the road 
or on the sidewalks along with them. 
 
And again, we are in relatively new times with this legislation. I 
would be looking at . . . Of course, as I’ve noted, other 
jurisdictions are also having to grapple with how to deal with 
impaired driving, due to the new cannabis legislation. And we’ll 
be interested to see what type of legislation and what type of 
research that already exists with regard to the best ways to deal 
with those impaired by drugs, and how to best deal with them. 
 
So I will again have opportunity to do that in committee, and I 
will take that opportunity to review further the comments of 
stakeholders and concerned citizens in the province. But I think 
with that, I am prepared to conclude my remarks here today. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 
that Bill No. 112, The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving 
Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 

[15:15] 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To what committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 112, The 
Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis 
Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The bill stands referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 126 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Eyre that Bill No. 126 — The Energy 
Export Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise today to enter into adjourned debates on Bill No. 126, 
The Energy Export Act. I spent some time discussing some of 
the ideas that are present in this Act during a 75-minute debate 
earlier with a number of the members opposite. And I want to 
draw your attention to a few points as they relate to this Act, but 
I won’t spend too much time up here on this today, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Our number one concern as we look to some of these issues, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is jobs. And as jobs critic, that resonates 
with me pretty closely. It’s something I am watching quite 
dutifully and consider it to be one of my primary critic duties. 
 
And we know that there are 1,100 jobs at Evraz that are at stake 
if this project doesn’t go forward. And we’re also concerned 
about jobs that could potentially be impacted here at the 
Lloydminster Upgrader, the Co-op Refinery, and in the trucking 
sector as well. So we are fighting for all Saskatchewan jobs. We 
want to be cautious about unintended consequences because we 
know, in these types of situations, unintended consequences can 
arise. And we know that we will need to spend some more time 
going through this bill and looking it at in a little bit more 
detail. 
 
Our party’s position with the Saskatchewan NDP has been clear 
on this for years. We are supportive of this project. It’s a federal 
project that has been approved. We believe it is in 
Saskatchewan’s best interest for this project to go forward. We 
support the triple-bottom-line process that ensures that we have 
economic benefits, but also social and environmental benefits as 
a key piece of the equation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We know that this project has been approved. The Trudeau 
Liberals need to show leadership to ensure that this project gets 



4168 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2018 

built, as that is the responsibility of theirs on the federal stage, 
to make sure that the provinces are working together. So we 
look to them for leadership. 
 
We certainly support the workers at Evraz who we know will be 
supplying 75 per cent of this project. And in speaking to some 
of the union representation, I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
we’re talking about over a year’s worth of work, several months 
of work that are still to be undertaken on this project. So that 
can have a significant impact on the workers here in Regina and 
their families as well. 
 
We know that the Sask Party has failed to meaningfully address 
climate change or have any credibility on the environment. 
They’ve cut funding for climate change and green energy. They 
don’t have a credible plan to reduce greenhouse gases, and a lot 
of those pieces are still left to be determined, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, which is quite disappointing. And of course they’ve 
failed to lay an inch of pipeline to tidewater in their time in 
government. 
 
So we won’t be signing any blank cheques. We need to go 
forward and make sure that we’ve examined the unintended 
consequences of this bill. So we’ll spend a little bit more time 
doing that. And I’ll let my colleagues weigh in more on some of 
their thoughts, and we’ll have a number of questions once the 
bill gets to committee as well. But for now, I would like to 
move that we adjourn debate for today on Bill No. 126, The 
Energy Export Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Fairview has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 126, The 
Energy Export Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 
Bill No. 129 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor that Bill No. 129 — 
The Saskatchewan Technology Start-up Incentive Act be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to rise this afternoon and enter into debate on Bill 
No. 129, An Act respecting the Saskatchewan Technology 
Start-up Incentive. And I listened with interest yesterday as the 
minister gave her remarks, and my colleague in his rebuttal, and 
of course we do have a lot of concerns. 
 
And I think that, you know, Saskatchewan has such a strong 
history of innovation, and it has been through our history. It’s 
who we are. We are blessed with people who always look at a 
problem as an opportunity and a way to do things differently. 
And this is the entrepreneurial spirit, and I think this is what 
makes Saskatchewan really exciting in so many ways. That’s 
how they’ve contributed to the Canadian economy, if not the 

global economy. 
 
So we look at this bill, and we’re going to look at it with a lot of 
interest. My colleague from Athabasca highlighted about the 
number of files that these folks have fallen short of, and I can 
just think of two that I’ll come back to on. The film tax credit, 
which even the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce 
commented on, about how critically important that that film tax 
credit was for Saskatchewan people, both in terms of work and 
in telling our story. And these folks managed to kill it, managed 
to kill it. And why? We still look back at that and say, why did 
you do that? 
 
And of course the other one, and I alluded to this a bit 
yesterday, of course was Enterprise Saskatchewan, the great 
wallpaper that was supposed to change the direction of 
Saskatchewan. But as the business writers of the day said, this 
could be Saskatchewan’s finest moment or its biggest flop. And 
we look back at it now and we know that in fact just last fall we 
took the Act and decommissioned the Act. I’ve forgotten the 
word for when you take an Act . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Repeal. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Repealed the Act, the Saskatchewan enterprise 
Act, because . . . And how ironic, how ironic the architect of the 
Saskatchewan enterprise is now working in Calgary. 
 
But so we look at this, we look at this bill . . . Now it was 
interesting yesterday the members opposite got very upset about 
this and said we should be making sure we send our best wishes 
to the citizen from Swift Current who’s found his new work in 
Calgary. And I’m wondering if these folks are sending all the 
people who are leaving Saskatchewan best wishes; we hope to 
see you back; and here’s a coupon for luggage. Here’s a coupon 
for luggage, you know, and whether it’s Samsonite or Swiss, or 
some . . . whatever it is. 
 
You know, I don’t think . . . I would think that Brad Wall would 
think he’s treated like anybody else, anybody else. We’ve heard 
this from these folks over there. We treat everyone equal. So if 
we send a best wishes card to Mr. Brad Wall and good luck in 
his new job and his office looks over 16th Street in Calgary, or 
wherever those law offices are located in Calgary, we should do 
the same. 
 
I don’t know if this is included in the budget here this time. 
We’re talking about a budget bill. And are they printing off 
cards for everybody who’s leaving Saskatchewan? Best wishes; 
glad to know you; you did a great job when you were here in 
Saskatchewan. Too bad you had to move to Alberta or BC. Or 
was it Ottawa you’re moving to . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Now they’re talking about, he didn’t move. He didn’t move but 
he’s got a new job. I think that was what the story was, wasn’t 
it? A new job in Calgary? And so . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Better check his licence plate. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Yes. Yes. And we understand that Premier 
Notley has, in her good will, says, you can keep your 
Saskatchewan licence plate. We’re not going to be checking 
your licence plates when he’s outside. 
 



May 2, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4169 

You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m trying to talk about this 
bill here and these folks keep getting me off track. But I do 
have to say, I do have to say that I am just reminded of how 
these folks over there are kind of in a kerfuffle about what 
luggage to get as long as that matches the best wishes card. 
 
I think that this is something that . . . We see this, the folks who 
were doing the film tax credit who were succeeding here in 
Saskatchewan, and now living in either Toronto or in 
Vancouver or Calgary. And in fact this law firm may actually 
be dealing with some of the those folks who had to leave 
Saskatchewan because of some of the bad choices these folks 
have made, some of the poor economic judgments that they 
have made in guiding this economy. They had record revenue 
for 10 years — record revenue. And what have we got? Record 
debt, record debt, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And what a mess we’re 
finding ourselves in today. 
 
And so with this bill, Mr. Speaker, this bill, we kind of have to 
say we’re going to have to see where this goes because, I tell 
you, they don’t have a great track record over there. Now we 
hope, we hope that the people of Saskatchewan can utilize this 
and do great things. We do think it’s important to make sure 
you have incentives for people to achieve great things and 
especially when we see the new businesses that are coming up 
through entrepreneurship here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But what this talks about really . . . And actually it was 
interesting. It was the day before the budget came out and I 
think one of the investors, owners of one of the tech companies 
that actually the minister refers to, talks about how, you know, 
it’s great to start up a company. It really is, and this is what this 
is going to address. But it’s also really important to keep the 
company here, not just start it up and have it sold to some other 
investor in Canada and have them move to Toronto or 
Vancouver. 
 
This is not just a start-up province; this is a place where we 
want to see people stay and have their jobs, keep their kids in 
their schools, see them go to school here, and achieve here in 
Saskatchewan. And we see this . . . Hopefully they get a good 
start-up here, but we want to see the next step; we want to see 
the next step. And I think that’s what other initiatives that these 
folks have killed, like the film tax credit, it wasn’t about making 
small films. It was about making the big movies here, and they 
were making the big movies here, and we see what these folks 
have done to initiatives like that. 
 
So this bill creates a 45 per cent non-refundable tax credit for 
investments in technology-based start-up investments, and 
that’s a good thing, and talks about how this must be a business 
that develops novel technology or uses the technology in a 
novel way to create new products, services, or processes. So it’s 
more than just hardware; it’s a software. It’s the applications 
that really make a difference, and we’ve seen that. And we see 
such incredible talent here in Saskatchewan in terms of being 
creative in how we can use technology to meet issues and 
solutions for people in Saskatchewan and across the world. So 
that’s important. 
 
So they have to apply to the government for a tax credit 
certificate, and that’s fair enough. That makes it work. Have to 
have fewer than 50 employees and 50 per cent of their 

employees have to be located in Saskatchewan, you know, the 
head office located in Saskatchewan, and not have previously 
raised over 5 million in equity capital. And the maximum 
annual investment for eligible investors is 500,000. 
 
And then the other question I would have is around making sure 
. . . How do we make this a fair, level playing field for all, and 
not one where you’re picking winners or losers or friends and 
those who just can’t seem to find their way to the minister’s 
door in a meaningful way? And so this will be a challenge. This 
will be a challenge for this government because, you know, as I 
said, their record in managing such a golden opportunity that 
we had in this province . . . And what are we left with? 
 
And as I said that we had a situation where, you know, 
everybody was optimistic and hopeful. And we see now . . . 
Actually I think the CFIB’s [Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business] new stats about optimism in small 
business is not that strong, not as strong as it once was. But with 
the paper on the economy that was presented in 2006 and ’07, 
the Enterprise Saskatchewan and how that — I don’t know how 
you describe this — negatively transformed. 
 
Now we don’t want to get any negative media here, but talk 
about a major mess that was left on economic development 
agencies across this province as they transformed different 
regional economic development agencies who bought in and 
were reconfigured and then at the end of the day were left 
holding an empty bag of hopes and aspirations. And what really 
was left from this new plan, this new idea, now with the repeal 
of The Enterprise Saskatchewan Act? And the minister is still 
there. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And when we have asked where did the money go, well a lot of 
it went to support this initiative, but it’s being quietly erased 
from the history of Saskatchewan. And from what happened in 
2007 to . . . Well it was the mid-2012 to ’14 when it really ran 
out of steam and finally they had to admit that it was not a good 
idea at all. In fact, it was a bad idea, and now we are seeing the 
impacts of that. 
 
And so we hope that this can do better than that. We hope that it 
wasn’t written on a napkin, it wasn’t an idea that was pitched in 
an airport, that it really had some solid research. The trouble is, 
Mr. Speaker . . . Yes, we’ve heard about this. This is, you know, 
one of the major incubators of the Sask Party is the airport 
lobbies, waiting for the next plane home, and so this is where 
some of their, apparently, their best ideas come from. 
 
I don’t know. I hope that . . . It will be interesting to see if this 
has been well researched and meets the needs because, right off 
the hopper, I have to tell you, listening to some of the folks in 
the industry, they are saying that we need, as I said, support, 
support for the industry, not just in the start-up phase. Excellent 
idea, but what happens once you’ve got it up and running? You 
have to maintain it. You have to maintain it. And this is where 
this government falls short, and that’s why so often start-ups 
start to look around, around Canada, around the world: where 
can we go to get the kind of support that we need to make 
things really work and so they can be sustainable? 
 



4170 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2018 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I would say that we will have a lot of 
questions about this in committee, about the sustainability of 
this idea. And really it is interesting because the minister did 
name several organizations that may benefit from this. Were 
they adequately consulted? Do they feel this is the right path? 
And I’m sure many of them would say, it’s the right direction 
but it doesn’t just stop at the end of this. They need more than 
just this to really grow their companies beyond 50 employees, 
that in fact we’re talking about companies that might have a 
hundred or several hundred indeed. That’s the kind of thing we 
want to see here in Saskatchewan. We don’t want to see them 
moving out of province to Toronto or Vancouver. 
 
So I have to say there is a couple of elephants in the room, and 
we talked about this, and that’s Enterprise Saskatchewan and 
it’s the film tax credit. What will happen when they sour on this 
idea? Will it stand the test of time? 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will move adjournment of Bill No. 
129, The Saskatchewan Technology Start-up Incentive Act. 
Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 129. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 124 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 124 — The 
Environmental Management and Protection (Environmental 
Handling Charges) Amendment Act, 2018 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s always 
a pleasure to add remarks to bill debate, and today I’ll be adding 
some remarks with regards to Bill 124, the environmental 
management and protection amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I saw there was quite a few bills 
with regards to amending environmental procedures and Acts, I 
was hoping to see that we would see some changes, being 
creative, a plan to create some environmental sustainability 
within the province, or a plan to promote green energy 
initiatives, or incentives to encourage residents to reduce, reuse, 
or recycle. But what this particular bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
it’s just instead more increased costs to our hard-working 
residents of Saskatchewan. 
 
And so with regards to the amendments with this bill, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it talks about the environmental handling fee 
changes. This was announced on March 23rd and the changes 
and the increased costs were starting on April 1st, 2018. And in 
fact it was not an April Fool’s joke but in fact some increased 
costs that are going to impact individuals. 
 

We see this increased cost going alongside other costs that 
came forward in the last budget with regards to when people go 
and buy any items that they can bring forward for 
reimbursement. But some of the costs aren’t able to be 
reimbursed and this is one particular cost. So last budget we 
saw that PST was added to some of these items as well as 
increased by 1 per cent. The deposit fees were also increased 
and now this, in fact the environmental fees. And so this is the 
third increase in 12 months, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and so like I 
said, this is going to have an impact on a lot of families. 
 
The minister, when he brought forward the changes with 
regards to this bill, indicated that the changes were needed for 
the sustainability of Saskatchewan’s beverage recycling 
program. The increase — it will be 2 cents on environmental 
handling charges for all recyclable beverage containers 
purchased in Saskatchewan and the deposits — he indicated are 
supposed to be used to fund the contract government holds with 
Sarcan to deliver the beverage container collection recycling 
program. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you start going through this 
bill a little bit more closely, it’s very evident that this increase is 
not going directly to Sarcan. In fact, until the negotiations in 
2020, they’re expecting that the 1 per cent will go back into 
Sarcan but that 1 per cent of this increase will continue to go 
into the General Revenue Fund. And I do understand that it’s 
based on two years back. That’s what is given to Sarcan. But 
we still haven’t gone to the purpose of the negotiations, and 
that’s still two years from now.  
 
And what’s happening with that 1 per cent? If it’s going into the 
General Revenue Fund, is it going to be allocated directly for 
environmentally sustainable programs or what will that be? 
Because my understanding will be that it’ll be at least $5 
million that’s going to be put back into the GRF [General 
Revenue Fund] and 5 million will be going back to Sarcan 
because it’s about a $10 million increase a year. So that’s just 
information I got off of media outlets. 
 
So I think the critic, when it comes time to go to committee, 
that that’ll definitely be some questions that’ll be worth asking 
and finding out and understanding exactly how this is because it 
does really appear to be a backdoor tax, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Individuals won’t know that it’s being directly opposed to them 
by this government, but their costs again will be increasing just 
like our utility rates have been increasing and all those other 
charges. 
 
I’m going to read some of what the expected costs will go up to. 
It looks like in the explanationary notes that the metal cans are 
going to be going up to 5 cents, the plastic bottles will be 6 
cents, the non-refillable glass bottles are 7 cents, and the 
multi-material, shelf-stable containers are 3 cents and the 
paper-based polycoat gable-top containers will be 3 cents. I 
believe that was how much they were previously, and so now 
that’ll all be up 2 more cents, so that’s quite a bit of money. 
And we do realize that everything is increasing and the cost 
with regards to recycling these items comes with a price as 
well. But I think the big item will be what’s going on with that 
1 per cent going to the General Revenue Fund. 
 
So they also indicated that . . . In one area it said these increases 



May 2, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4171 

are supposed to sustain the program until approximately 2024, 
but I also read that they’re hoping that the increase of the 1 cent 
to Sarcan will sustain the program till 2030. So that would be 
10 years. In 10 years we know exactly how much costs have 
gone up here, so I don’t know if that is going to be sustainable. 
Those are going to be definitely questions worth asking — how 
much the costs have gone up within these past 10 years. 
 
But I think it’s really important though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that we talk about the fact that Saskatchewan does have a pretty 
impressive recycling program. I do have to admit that. 
Travelling across the country, travelling to other countries, I’m 
really always simply impressed with the fact that we do do a 
good job with ensuring that we try to recycle as much as we 
can, and I hope we continue on that path. Because when I go to 
other countries or provinces and see all the bottles in the 
garbage and knowing that that’s going to the landfills, it’s really 
disappointing when we know that there is such a good option 
out there. 
 
And Sarcan within our province does an excellent job with 
providing that service, and I believe they’re one of the most 
successful recycling programs in Canada. So that’s great, and 
it’s I believe due to the really good and hard work of the 
employees that work in that agency. And I’ve read here that 
Sarcan has helped divert 49 million pounds of materials from 
our landfills over the past eight years and employs 600 people 
of all abilities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So that is really impressive. 
They’ve done a great job to be a very inclusive workplace and 
we’re all very proud, on both sides of the House, with regards 
to that. 
 
And we know that they’re regularly seeing recyclable return 
rates of over 80 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I think that’s 
really quite impressive because we know some areas of the 
province might not have regular access to Sarcan, or some 
individuals might have a little bit of an issue with regards to 
accessing the service. But regardless, 80 per cent is very 
impressive. And I know some of these items do go into the 
municipal recycling program and the municipalities that do 
their best to bring those back into the proper recycling 
programs. So I think that’s something that needs to be 
addressed, needs to be celebrated because we do have a good 
recycling program. And even how good it is, I know there are 
ways that we can make it even better. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we do need to ensure that we have a 
sustainable environmental management plan, and we have to 
commit to protecting our environment. That’s so very 
important. And so I think when bills like this come for 
amendment this gives us a great opportunity to have those 
discussions. And I know there’ll be more questions that the 
critic will have when they have an opportunity to talk at 
committee, and I know my fellow colleagues will have a lot 
more they’ll want to add with regards to this debate. 
 
But like I said before, with reviewing this information I had 
more questions than answers with regards to how the increase 
of funds will be spent. We have to acknowledge that this 
presents another burden to families, and we need to look at how 
we’re supporting families within our province. And we know 
that this is going to be an increase, that consumers will be 
paying more, but they’re not going to be receiving the benefits 

with regards to it. So we need to be mindful of that as well. 
 
[15:45] 
 
So like I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have other colleagues that 
will want to add more remarks with regards to changes with 
regards to this legislation. And I know the critic will do an 
excellent job with discussion in committee with those questions 
as well. So at this time I’m going to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
124, the environmental management and protection amendment 
Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 
Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 124. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 125 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 125 — The 
Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to rise 
again this afternoon to enter into debate on Bill No. 125, The 
Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act. Mr. 
Speaker, this was a bill that was introduced with this year’s 
budget and of course, due to it being a budget bill, there is 
limited opportunity with regard to scrutiny. We’ll have, I guess, 
five hours to enter into debate and to look for details and ask 
questions of the minister and his officials with regard to this 
bill. 
 
Of course I think the intent is fairly straightforward — to 
encourage investment in the value-added agriculture sector in 
our province. Of course this is something that we talk about 
often and going back probably as far as I can remember in this 
province, and that is the need to diversify to ensure that we 
grow the value-added sector in our province. 
 
Of course we are well known in this province for our abundance 
of resources, for our crop-growing capacity, and the quality and 
innovation of our producers in this province. So I don’t think 
that we have any debate about that in this Assembly from either 
side, nor do we have debate about the need to ensure that there 
is investment to encourage those to, not only to produce 
products in this province but to increase the value-added sector. 
 
There was a news release that was released on first reading of 
this bill on the 19th of April of this year, just after the budget. 
The minister entered some comments with regard to this bill, 
and I quote: 
 

Robust economic growth and new investment in key 
sectors is crucial to Saskatchewan’s people and . . . [their] 
communities. To accomplish this, we must continually find 



4172 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2018 

new ways to foster a competitive business environment in 
our province. 

 
Of course this is a province, at the current time, in need of that 
investment and that growth and also the jobs that go along with 
it. We know that we have had some pretty difficult numbers 
with regard to GDP in this province recently as well as with 
regard to jobs numbers. And that is a concern to members on 
this side of the aisle and I’m sure to people across the province. 
 
Of course producing those goods is important, and we 
encourage and support the growth of that sector. But part of the 
piece is then ensuring that we have timely access to markets, 
and part of that is through our rail system in this province as it 
is across the country but maybe a little more acutely felt here in 
this province, a landlocked province. 
 
So I’d just like to enter my comments on the record about the 
need to ensure timely access to rail. And once those contracts 
are filled, that our producers or our manufacturers, our 
value-added manufacturers, are able to fulfill those contracts 
and get those goods to market in a timely manner. And I hope 
that some effective intervention and action on that front is also 
part of the broad picture in this province, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
all sorts of opportunities in this province. I’m sure any 
community you go to, you can imagine places where, you 
know, people ask the question, well why don’t we do that here? 
Why aren’t we doing that already in Saskatchewan? 
 
I think of a recent example. I had the opportunity to go to an 
evening at the Rebellion Brewing here in Regina and have a 
tour of their facility which was a pretty good tour. I would 
encourage anyone, if they’re able, take a driver and go along on 
that tour. And we got to talking about malt barley on that tour 
and got asking the tour guide where they got their malt barley 
from. 
 
I was a little bit surprised to learn that there’s only one malt 
barley facility in the province, and they have an exclusive 
contract with one of the beer companies. So these smaller 
breweries have to import their malt barley from out of the 
province which, you know, in a province like Saskatchewan is a 
little surprising and perplexing. So I think that there was some 
comment specifically made about increasing our capacity with 
regard to malt barley facilities in the province. But that’s just 
but one area that might be encouraged to grow in this province 
and certainly is something that we would like to see. 
 
Other possibilities, as noted in the press release and I think are 
reasonable, would be the pea protein processors, oat milling 
operations. I know I had opportunity to listen to Ian Boxall 
from APAS [Agricultural Producers Association of 
Saskatchewan] recently give a presentation to the special 
committee on Bill 49 in Ottawa, talk about the oats that he grew 
on his farm and his son eating oats at the table, and the 
discrepancy in terms of what he got for a price and what he 
actually had to purchase those oats for. So I think encouraging 
that value-add in this province does make a great deal of sense. 
 
Again, as I spoke to a bill earlier, we are in a new era in this 
country and one of the potential areas of growth is in cannabis 
products. And the news release by the ministry did note that 
cannabis oil processing facilities might be something that would 

benefit from this type of non-refundable tax credit. We look 
forward to seeing what might come of that. 
 
I can’t help but note this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we have a 
minister standing up and extolling the virtues of the 
non-refundable tax credit. I, of course, represent the folks of 
Regina Lakeview and something that I hear frequently on the 
doorstep is the concern, a continued concern over the loss of the 
non-refundable tax credit for the film industry. So interesting 
that on one hand this is seen as a worthwhile endeavour by the 
government but yet it’s the same government that basically shut 
down an entire industry in this province when they made that 
decision despite the warnings, the protests, the very reasoned 
arguments of folks within the film industry but also those 
within the chamber of commerce and from other sectors. And 
now we see further damage to that industry with the potential 
sale of the provincially owned sound stage. 
 
So it’s interesting when, you know, there’s much talk of 
winners and losers in this Assembly as there has been, but I 
think that I couldn’t stand in my place without noting the 
different treatment of those two industries. It’s not a matter of 
either-or, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think it could very conceivably 
be both but for some reason this government refuses to show 
the same type of investment in that industry. And I think that 
that is incredibly unfortunate and certainly is something that I 
hear a lot on the doorstep. 
 
The incentive, as noted in the news release, is designed to be 
used in addition to other existing incentives. What’s being 
proposed is a redemption of the benefits limited to 20 per cent 
in one year after the facility enters operation — I think this is a 
minimum $10 million facility, if I’m not mistaken — 30 per 
cent in year 2 and 50 per cent in year 3 with a maximum 
carry-forward of 10 years on any remaining credit. One thing I 
do note at the bottom of the press release is this program will be 
accepting applications in mid to late 2019. 
 
So it sounds like there’s still details being rolled out there, Mr. 
Speaker, and I think those are details that we will be keen to 
delve into further, as the critic will be when this bill goes to 
committee. 
 
Here’s the piece I was just talking about. In order to be eligible 
for the value-added certificate, an applicant must be able to 
invest at least 10 million in new capital and submit to 
inspections from government officials to ensure that all rules 
are being followed. This certainly is significant investment in 
Saskatchewan, a $10 million minimum. And hopefully we’ll 
see the details of the oversight that will be required of those 
making that investment. Certainly we’ll be paying close 
attention. 
 
I know that there have been some, you know, big projects 
announced with much fanfare by this government and then they 
have seemed to have gone off the rails a little bit. No pun 
intended, Mr. Speaker. But I think that’s why the limited 
oversight that we will have here, and I guess continue to have in 
this Assembly, will be that much more important. 
 
And just to continue as this bill, should it pass, the success that 
it has in actually encouraging that investment in Saskatchewan, 
again no debate from this side of the House that this investment 



May 2, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4173 

is much needed. And hopefully when we have the opportunity 
to ask questions, we’ll get some further details about it. 
 
I don’t know that there’s much more that I can add to this other 
than putting more and more of my questions about it on the 
record. Certainly this side of the House stands firm in support 
of our agriculture industry and encourages the continued 
innovation and investment in that sector and the value to our 
economy and to jobs in this province that comes with that, 
again. But I think that we will have more questions as this bill 
continues through second reading and on to committee. With 
that, I will move to adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 125, The Saskatchewan 
Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 89 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Eyre that Bill No. 89 — The School 
Choice Protection Act/Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Join in on 
Bill 89, The School Choice Protection Act. Initially I guess on 
this side of the House, we support the appeal that’s going 
forward through the process of the courts. But before I get into 
talking a little bit about those areas, I guess from our side of it, 
there are many people watching this and seeing how it’s going 
to play out, and individuals that want to see. And they’re asking 
for I think clarity when it comes to this bill. 
 
Bill 89, again The School Choice Protection Act, legislation 
that’s been introduced by the government and again, as I said, 
supported by the opposition to fund publicly public school, 
public funding for education for our children — that’s definitely 
where we stand. Our support is there on that. Having said that, 
the process . . . Obviously, you know, one side brought an 
action forward to the courts. A ruling was brought down. Now 
there’s an appeal going on. 
 
And that appeal, you know, we have said we support the appeal 
to again bring clarity. But also with that clarity I think it’s going 
to be time. And you know, at the time I believe the government, 
the Premier, you know, have certain tools that they can use. 
And they have already said, you know, they’re willing to use 
some of those tools. But we’ll see. Right now I think what 
needs to happen, and from my understanding, the appeal is 
going through. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Now we talk about time. To hear that appeal could take years. 
Maybe it could take five years, even longer. So right now my 

understanding is the status quo will be the way it’s being 
operated and the way government funds public education in the 
province of Saskatchewan and the funding that follows 
students. That’s the way it will be until that appeal I guess is 
heard. And you know, once we get there I guess that clarity will 
eventually hopefully be there for individuals. 
 
Now whether government at the day uses some different tools 
that, you know, they have at their disposal to use, that’s up to 
them. But having said that, overall I guess from our point, this 
side of the House, we have, you know, we have talked. We’ve 
made it very clear. I know my colleagues and myself have 
talked about this bill and we want to make it very clear on our 
side where we come from, and I think we’ve articulated that 
quite well. The critic has articulated that well. 
 
And we’ll get an opportunity in committee to ask some 
questions and, you know, whatever . . . We’re not sure of 
answers that we have. And when we’re consulting with 
individuals and we go out there and we talk to certain 
individuals, some people understand it; some don’t. You know, 
some are confused with it. They’re not sure. But they’re asking 
for that clarity. And I think there’s going to be an opportunity to 
provide that once the challenge goes through and, like I said, 
once it goes through the appeal. 
 
But having said that, my colleague will have an opportunity 
with the minister and the officials to get clarification as best we 
can on our side. Where does the government go on this? And if 
government has a plan, whether the minister, the Premier, the 
government of the day, what exactly is their plan? And they’re 
willing to use some of these tools this way and that way. So I 
guess we’re going to have an opportunity to ask some questions 
in committee. 
 
And again we need . . . And I think people are asking for that, 
you know. The government of the day has the obligation to be 
clear, and the people are asking that. They want clarity on this. 
But even if at the end of the time, I think once the decision and 
the ruling comes, and whatever that may be . . . You know, I 
don’t know what it will be. Again, it will be in appeals court. 
That decision will come. 
 
But at the end of the day, however that change comes, whether 
it’s one way or the other, I think there’s time. And people are 
asking, we’re going to need some time for everyone to adjust to 
whatever change and if there is changes. And people are asking 
for that time. What will that time be? 
 
And you know, I think government will have to consult with 
people if there is going to be, you know, any changes one way 
or the other. If it is the same, it’s going to operate the funding 
formula the way it is, then there’ll be no changes and it’ll just 
go on. But if that appeal should happen and be, you know, not 
won, I guess, or goes one way, then again I talk about the time. 
And the people are asking, to implement any changes if there 
are going to be changes, if there is changes, there’s a timeline 
that people will definitely want to be able to have that. And I 
think that’s what the public would ask. I think that’s what 
school boards would ask, what, you know, probably 
government, at the end of the day — I can’t speak for them — 
but they would want time to get everything adjusting because 
there would be some big changes if, you know, their appeal 



4174 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2018 

does not go the way they want. 
 
So I guess at the end of the day for me it’s a bill that again, for 
some people are watching this closely, and I think will be 
watching it closely, and watching the tools that government has 
to use . . . But again that appeal process is where we’re at, and 
until that happens . . . And like I said, that could be five years or 
more before that appeal is ever heard. 
 
So at that point, I really don’t have much more to say about this 
bill, Mr. Speaker. And I know my colleagues will have more to 
say on it, and in committee. As we, you know, talk with 
individuals, boards of education, and whoever, we can get 
clarification. If they have questions or concerns, they know they 
can get hold of us. And they reach out, as my colleague reached 
out to the boards of education, whether it’s, you know, public or 
separate school divisions, she has a good rapport and she 
reaches out to them. I guess if they have questions from 
ourselves as sitting MLAs on both sides of the House, I guess 
those are questions we can ask of the minister and the ministry 
officials. 
 
So at this point, I have no further comments on Bill 89. I’m 
prepared to adjourn on Bill 89. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 89, The School Choice 
Protection Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 111 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doke that Bill No. 111 — The 
Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’m pleased to be able to rise today and address the Assembly in 
terms of the proposed changes to The Municipal Tax Sharing 
(Potash) Act. The minister, when he introduced the bill back 
last fall, gave fairly extensive comments in terms of the 
intention of the bill and some of the changes that are being 
proposed. And I think this is something that came as a result of 
a need for modernization. There’s clearly some of the clauses 
need to be modernized, and also a call by the rural 
municipalities affected by this, and the urban municipalities as 
it affects resort villages and small towns, Mr. Speaker — so 
those areas around potash mines where municipalities are able 
to assess taxes in order to collect enough revenue to deal with 
the impact of the mine in their area. And that’s exactly what 
needs to happen and has been happening for decades, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I think with my time today I just want to address the 
specifics of the bill itself and point out some of the changes that 

are being made to the existing bill, which is c M-34, of the 
current Act. And as the minister indicated, it was introduced 
many decades ago. 1968 was when it was first introduced, and 
you know, Mr. Speaker, from then until now, the impact of the 
potash industry has had on our province and the significant 
resources that it’s brought to our economy. A number of 
significant mines have now been built in Saskatchewan and it 
has a colourful history as well, Mr. Speaker. And you’ll recall 
the actions of the Blakeney governor when it came to dealing 
with potash and then the Devine government changed that. So 
it’s been an interesting history of a resource here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But certainly it’s a resource that’s impacting agriculture all over 
the world. And when we talk about needing to feed the planet, 
Mr. Speaker, the fertilizer value of potash has changed so much 
for so many farmers across the world. And as you know we 
export potash outside of the country and certainly it serves our 
producers very well here in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I just want to go through the bill clause by clause and just 
point out some of the changes that are being made. The first 
clause that’s being impacted is the existing interpretation clause 
or definitions clause. And that’s always found in section 2 of 
pretty much every piece of legislation that exists in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So pretty much all of the definitions that exist are being 
changed somewhat except for “board.” There’s a definition for 
area of influence and the original definition was, “the 
geographic areas of the province designated by the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council.” That’s being changed now as, “‘area of 
influence’ means, with respect to a potash mine, an area of 
Saskatchewan as determined in accordance with the 
regulations.” So not a big change, Mr. Speaker, because if it’s 
in the regulations, it’s under the authority of the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council. So I imagine there’s some drafting 
concerns about this. I think they both pretty much say the same 
thing. 
 
I would have questions in committee as to exactly what an area 
of influence is meant to describe when we’re talking about this 
bill. And I’m assuming that it’s an area that’s designated around 
a potash mine and how far that area of influence goes would 
determine who’s able to . . . which municipalities are able to 
raise taxes in association with that particular potash mine. And 
I’m sure officials and the minister would be able to provide 
more of an explanation for that if so asked. 
 
The definition of actual municipal mill rate is now defined 
rather than referring to the municipal mill rate under The 
Municipalities Act. There’s an actual formula which I’ll get to. 
 
The “board” is the same, that definition hasn’t changed, nor has 
“minister.” 
 
There’s a new definition for operational mine, and it means, “a 
potash mine that is determined to be operational by the minister 
by order.” So I can only presume, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
there is some concern about whether a mine is operational or 
not operational. I’m not aware of any potash mines in 
Saskatchewan that are not operational, but there may be some 
that exist and presumably the, you know, taxation is tied to 



May 2, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4175 

production. So if they’re not an operating mine, perhaps there 
are issues with regard to taxation of mines that aren’t operating. 
So that’s something the minister will be able to elucidate on 
when it’s in committee, this bill is in the committee process. 
 
Potash mine assessments are pretty much similar to the existing 
clause. I’m just looking at it, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s very 
similar. Taxing rural municipality is also very much similar to 
the existing bill. 
 
There’s a new definition of tax tool and that’s, “a tax tool as 
defined in section 290.1 of The Municipalities Act.” It’s not 
exactly clear to me what those tools are for municipalities, but 
there seems to be an impact, definitely impact on the way 
taxation and taxes are levied on potash development under this 
bill. So there’s a new definition there. 
 
Also a new definition for total municipal levy which means, 
“the tax revenue generated through the mill rate, mill rate 
factors, base tax, minimum tax and any other property tax 
pursuant to The Municipalities Act.” So that’s the total 
municipal levy is now defined. 
 
Another new definition that’s being introduced is the total 
municipal taxable assessment which means, “the total taxable 
assessments for municipal purposes for all property classes that 
are calculated pursuant to The Municipalities Act.” Again it’s 
not clear to me why this form of requirement for a definition is 
necessary, but that’s something that the officials can provide 
when this bill is before the committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then the final definition is the same, urban municipality, 
although . . . Sorry, it’s not the same. It’s been specifically 
changed. Previously in the existing bill or existing Act, urban 
municipality means, “a town or village to which The 
Municipalities Act applies but does not include a resort village.” 
And this is being changed to include resort villages. So the 
current proposed definition reads, “‘urban municipality’ means 
a town, village or resort village to which The Municipalities Act 
applies.” The minister gave some reasons for why resort 
villages are now being included in those entities that are 
capable of raising taxes through this municipal tax sharing 
agreement. And the basic . . . He says the difference between 
then and now is that many people actually live year-round in 
resort villages and therefore should be entitled to raised taxes. 
I’m not sure if that’s . . . I don’t know what the percentage of 
permanent residents are in some of these resort villages, so I’m 
not sure if it’s 80 per cent or 90 per cent or is it 10 per cent. 
 
So it’s an interesting policy change, but the minister didn’t give 
a lot of reasons for why, other than some people live full time in 
resort villages and therefore they’re now being given the right 
to raise taxes in relation to a potash mine. 
 
So when you think of purposes of taxation, it just seems a bit of 
a strange extension of the taxation authority on potash mines. 
Typically, you know, authorities are given the ability to raise 
levies to cover costs associated with that industry. And I’m not 
sure how resort villages would be impacted by potash mines. So 
that would be certainly a question that I would have when this 
bill is before the committee. 
 
The next piece is new, and this is the actual calculation for the 

municipal mill rate. It’s being enshrined in the legislation here. 
Often you see this being punted down to the regulation sphere, 
but this is being actually outlined here in the Act. And I’ll share 
with you the formula. It goes as follows: AMR equals TML 
over TMTA times 1,000. So AMR is the actual municipal mill 
rate and TML is the total municipal levy for the rural 
municipality and TMTA is the total municipal taxable 
assessment of the rural municipality. 
 
And we don’t see this for resort villages. And I’m not sure if 
this would even apply to resort villages. So again that raises 
questions about how resort villages will be incorporated into 
this regime. And it’s something that I think may need some 
clarity, although I could be missing something here for sure, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:15] 
 
So now section 3 in the existing Act deals with the board and 
this is . . . They’re actually repealing an entire section, although 
the new section has a lot of the old section in it. But the board 
that’s established to keep track of these taxes is the municipal 
potash tax sharing administration board. They will continue to 
be appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council but it’s 
being expanded. 
 
So rather than just . . . We used to have two people from SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] and one 
appointed by the minister. We now have two more people being 
added. One person is to be nominated by SUMA [Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association] and the other person is to be 
nominated by the Saskatchewan Potash Producers Association. 
So I think the intent here is that the potash producers have 
requested that there be representation at the table where these 
decisions are being made and the government is responding to 
that request accordingly, so they will have a spot at the table on 
the board for the tax sharing of potash revenues. 
 
The nominations process is also fairly similar, although we now 
need to include SUMA as part of the nominations process. It’s 
not clear here how the potash producers person will be 
nominated, although we know it will actually be nominated by 
the potash producers, but there’s no process or requirements 
there. SUMA and SARM both have to appoint a person who is 
either a reeve or councillor, and then a member of the executive 
of SARM and SUMA. So there’s some requirements there in 
terms of who can represent SARM and SUMA. 
 
Another new clause that I think is just housekeeping is what 
happens if somebody on the board dies or resigns, so there’s 
some provision made for that. And the head office will continue 
to be in Regina, so that hasn’t changed. And the term I think, 
yes, on section 4 of the existing Act, the term of the office is for 
one year. That’s being expanded to two years, so that’s a bit of 
a change there, Mr. Speaker. And with the former membership 
being three, quorum of the board was two. Now that the board 
is five, they had to change the quorum as well. So that’s the 
new section 5 where three members of the board will now 
constitute quorum for the board. 
 
6(2) is being replaced, and this section 6 is how the members 
get paid. And this is for anybody on the board who’s an 
employee of the Government of Saskatchewan. And when I 



4176 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2018 

think . . . I guess that may be the person nominated, likely is the 
person nominated by the minister. It just deals with . . . it seems 
to reword how those people can be reimbursed for services, and 
the only expenses that are allowable for compensation is 
attending meetings and carrying out business of the board — 
which is a fairly wide sphere — but I’m sure it wouldn’t be 
anything more than what the requirements are for out of pocket 
for being a member of the board. There’s a new clause that’s 
being added . . . Oh I’m sorry, that’s . . . It’s basically just 
rewording the existing section 6(2). 
 
The next clause that’s being changed is section 8, and section 8 
is about the mill rate that is to be set by the board. There’s some 
housekeeping amendments here. You can see this is reference to 
days gone by because the word “miles” is still in there and 
that’s being substituted for “kilometres.” We’re getting metric, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that’s happening here in this bill. 
Little behind the times maybe, but never say never. We just 
keep cleaning it up as we go along. 
 
The mill rate definition . . . Sorry, 8(3) refers to the actual mill 
rate applicable and that’s being changed to the actual municipal 
mill rate applicable. And I presume that’s because of the 
municipal mill rate definition that’s being introduced in the bill. 
 
There’s new sections 8.1 to 8.3, and I think this is the real 
substance of the bill. It’s the “Setting base date and 
accommodating assessment changes.” So the first part of this 
new section talks about definitions for “base date” and a “new 
mine.” So I guess those are important things that need to be 
looked at. And there’s some fairly complicated clauses in this 
new section dealing with the new base date and if new lands are 
used and how the calculations will be done. So it’s a fairly 
technical clause that will mean a lot more to officials who have 
to do these calculations than myself, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But it seems like a new mine is a concern. And one of the things 
that’s being identified in the new clause 8.1(4) is: 
 

If a potash mine is deemed to be a new mine in a year in 
which a new base date takes effect, then in that year: 

 
(a) if the new mine’s area of influence overlaps with one 
or more existing areas of influence to create a new, 
expanded area of influence: 

 
(i) the adjusted mill rate [will be] calculated and . . . 
be applied to the new mine’s potash mine 
assessments.  
 

And then the distribution of the tax revenues would be then “. . . 
distributed to all eligible municipalities within the expanded 
area of influence . . .”  
 
And I think we see that, you know, new mines are coming on 
stream, Mr. Speaker. The K+S mine recently became a new 
mine. I’m not sure if that’s in your riding, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
No, you’re further north than that, aren’t you? Or east. Okay. So 
I can’t remember if that’s Thunder Creek or somewhere in that 
area, but certainly in the Bethune area north of Moose Jaw. So 
that mine is obviously going to change the area of influence and 
expand it and also possibly overlap with some of the existing 
mines. So those things have to be accounted for. 

There’s also a new clause 8.2, which is the “Mill rate calculated 
for first time.” So that’s a new clause bringing clarity and then 
an exception. Of course the good old Lieutenant Governor in 
Council may, by order, reduce the mill rate established. So I’m 
not sure when the Lieutenant Governor in Council would 
reduce a mill rate that a municipality has established pursuant to 
the new formula, but there it is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Section 11 is also being amended with a couple of changes. The 
minister is now going to . . . It’s required by law that the 
minister receive a report, identified in section 11, and that’s the 
annual report. So it’s saying not only do they have to present it 
to SARM and the particular municipalities mentioned, it now 
has to come to the minister. And that report has to be tabled in 
this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. So we will now see, as part of the 
tabling of documents here in this Assembly, we will see the 
annual report of the board for this taxation authority. 
 
Another change that’s being made is the board is supposed to 
communicate the mill rate to potash mines. Potash mines were 
wanting better communication there. That’s section 11.1. 11.2 
is talking about the tax tools that I mentioned earlier. 11.3 sets a 
municipal deadline for tax remittance. 11.4 talks about funds of 
the board and how they are to be deposited. 11.5 talks about 
distribution of revenues, and 11.6 is a clarification on the appeal 
process if an assessment is to be appealed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’ve reworked, under section 12, the immunity clause. It 
used to be called “Personal liability of members of the board,” 
and it’s now called “Immunity.” So it’s some new language 
there. 
 
And then the regulation, there’s a few new regulatory 
authorities that are being established for the Lieutenant 
Governor, dealing with things like expenses of the board; the 
date and manner how the board will provide the mill rates to the 
potash mines and the Potash Producers Association; additional 
requirements for tax revenue collection; establishing other dates 
for tax remission; and duties or responsibilities of the 
secretary-treasurer of the board. That’s the extent of the new 
clauses in the regulatory section. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s some of the technical aspects of this bill. 
I think the minister’s comments covered the need for these 
changes. And at this point in time, I’m sure that other of my 
colleagues will want to enter into the debate, so I will move to 
adjourn the debate on Bill No. 111, The Municipal Tax Sharing 
(Potash) Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 111. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 113 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doke that Bill No. 113 — The 
Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 



May 2, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4177 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 
pleasure again to rise and enter into second reading debate on 
this bill, The Planning and Development Amendment Act. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a lot of respect for those who undertake the 
important role of planning, of looking at our municipalities 
thoughtfully and planning towards growth and ensuring the best 
use of the land that we share here in the province. 
 
I note on the second reading by the minister that there were 
some consultations that were undertaken, going back actually a 
number of years. I’m just going to read a little bit of that. The 
minister noted that the Ministry of Government Relations 
consulted extensively with stakeholders in preparation of this 
bill, actually going back to 2014-15 and then again in 2016-17, 
that there were a number of engagement sessions involving 
stakeholders representing a full 59 different organizations. So 
certainly that is interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as something 
that we do like to see on this side of the House is that type of 
consultation. 
 
In terms of who initiated the need for changes to this bill, it’s 
not something that is revealed by the minister in his second 
reading comments. Some of the folks who were consulted in 
that session, that planning session, include the SARM, SUMA, 
home builders in Regina, the public and Catholic school 
divisions, the Ministry of Education, the Minister of 
Agriculture. So fairly extensive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the things that I immediately thought of when I looked 
at this bill was the process around land acquisition with the P3 
schools. Certainly that goes back a few years now, but some of 
the changes I can’t help but wonder if they aren’t reactionary to 
some of the problems that were incurred with that process. And 
I’ll get into that a little bit later. 
 
Some of what is proposed with this legislation, first of all, that 
there are amendments that ensure that conflict of interest 
provisions apply to members of the district development 
appeals board and member of any regional planning authorities. 
That seems prudent, Mr. Speaker. And of course there have 
been some high-profile cases with regard to conflict of interest 
within municipalities that certainly come to mind when reading 
that. 
 
There are 10 cities in Saskatchewan that have been granted 
approving authority status. I’m not sure how those were chosen, 
but that is what is proposed here. This amendment allows the 
minister to modify the terms of an order granting authority 
status to achieve provincial interests. So this is sort of a big 
deal, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at the minister 
increasing powers to impose decisions on other levels of 
government, and it’s certainly something that we have seen as a 
theme here. I think that we have heard some concerns about the 
ability, with passage of this bill, for the minister to impose that 
will on other levels of government, specifically cities. 
 
I think of the whole P3 process in particular with the northwest 
school, P3 school that was proposed. Typically in 
municipalities — I’ll speak about Regina which I know a little 
more about, Mr. Deputy Speaker — land in new subdivisions is 

generally set aside for school use in a given subdivision. 
Typically the pattern that happens is the developer goes in, 
develops the land around it, and the revenues raised go towards 
supporting the infrastructure to that site. 
 
Now when we had the P3 schools, the footprint of these schools 
is well beyond what we see with the building of a regular-sized 
elementary school. These are schools that house over 1,000 
students when your typical elementary school would be about in 
the range of 400, 450 students. So much bigger buildings, 
which I know did present a bit of an issue in Harbour Landing, 
trying to find a tract of land that would fit this large P3 school. 
 
[16:30] 
 
But there was an even bigger problem in the northwest of 
Regina where there was no tract of land that was set aside, and I 
can’t go into the reasons why that was. I actually don’t know. It 
goes back . . . This is land that had been developed decades 
before. And looking for a site in the northwest, there wasn’t one 
that was readily available that would fit a school of this size, the 
P3 school size. So some will remember that there was a 
significant amount of concern that was expressed, I suspect, in 
this legislature but certainly at the city hall in Regina with 
regard to who is going to be responsible for the costs for 
servicing that land. 
 
Again, typically there would be a subdivision around that 
school site that would pay for some of that servicing. In this 
instance, the city found themselves on the hook for much of that 
servicing cost upfront. So that was a bit of a concern. And I 
understand, if I’m reading this correctly, that this bill would 
make that process for the province to insist on that type of 
development easier. And I think that that is some concern and 
has been a concern expressed by municipalities. 
 
Currently the ability to apply policies for site plan control is 
limited to commercial and industrial land. This now expands to 
include institutional land such as schools and mixed-use 
development. So this would potentially allow the minister 
additional powers not currently in the purview of the minister. 
So anytime that that happens, of course you want to ask why, 
why that is. And certainly it follows along a theme that we’ve 
seen from this government, and that is a willingness to usurp 
powers from other levels of government. 
 
We’ve seen this with municipalities. We’ve seen this with 
school boards, up to and including a threat of dissolving school 
boards altogether with Bill 63 last year. So I know that we have 
had many conversations with municipalities about their take on 
this and will continue to do so. 
 
The minister had and will still have the ability to require 
municipalities to amend their official community plan to 
achieve consistency with provincial interests. That’s a very 
interesting provision. Of course cities put a lot of effort into the 
crafting of their official community plan to meet the goals of 
their citizens and to plan long range. It would be interesting to 
see some instances where an official community plan would be 
thwarted because of some opposing provincial interests. And 
I’m not sure that I can think of any, but there must be some that 
are anticipated if we’re seeing here. So I think we’d want to 
look a little closer into that. 



4178 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2018 

A new section in this Act adds some flexibility for timelines 
that municipalities have to abide by minister’s orders. And it 
requires:  
 

. . . municipalities to develop their . . . site policies 
collaboratively with the Minister of Education, any local 
school divisions, and any municipality(s) that the Ministry 
of Education determines is necessary . . . 

 
So that’s interesting. You might have the requirement for more 
than one municipality to collaborate, if the minister does deem 
that necessary. And I think that’s something above what we 
currently see. 
 
This bill does impact municipalities in a very potentially 
substantial way, and it does seem to fit along the theme that 
we’ve seen from this government of increasing its centralization 
of power within ministers’ offices. And I know that that has 
been a concern that I know that I’ve heard and members on this 
side have heard from every corner of this province. You know, 
we elect officials, certainly to this Assembly, but also at the 
municipal and the school board level, and we do so with the 
expectation that they know their communities well and that they 
will serve their communities well, and that they have the local 
knowledge of their local constituency, their local subdivision, 
or their local ward. 
 
So it is something that warrants further scrutiny, just as to why 
we might look at undermining some of those powers of our 
local leaders. Certainly they have their eyes on the ground. 
They’re the folks that probably, you know, take all of those 
calls and have intimate knowledge of their community. So why 
we’re contemplating that, I guess, is a question for the critic to 
ask in committee. 
 
And I know that we already have heard some concerns, not only 
from local governments, but from developers about this bill. 
And you know, again I appreciate the consultations that were 
noted in the minister’s second reading, but further scrutiny 
would require us to see what exactly came out of those 
consultations: what was said, what the areas of concern, maybe 
the areas of agreement were with this particular piece of 
legislation. Concerns exist about the municipalities plan, just 
the whole lack of transparency around the P3s, I think which 
continues today, as we have been talking about the P3 schools 
and the grid for maintenance and the abilities of municipalities 
to plan if they have to be looking over their shoulder, that if the 
minister doesn’t agree with their official community plan, that 
there may be some intervention there and apparent centralizing 
of power, again to impose political influence on municipalities.  
 
And again this is power once granted in legislation to the 
minister that’s difficult to go back on without, you know, going 
through the legislative process. So it’s important that we make 
sure that the voices of those who do have concerns about this 
bill are heard. And I know that the critic has been doing her 
diligence with regard to ensuring that she has spoken to 
stakeholders and has a good grasp on the areas where they 
approve and agree with this bill and the areas where they have 
outstanding concerns. 
 
I think with that I would like to allow other of my colleagues to 
have opportunity to speak to this bill, and of course eventually 

the critic in committee. But with that I will move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 113, The Planning and 
Development Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 114 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 114 — The 
Vehicles for Hire Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 
on Bill 114, The Vehicles for Hire Act. I guess initially people 
are going to be watching this, and I know there’s certain 
legislation that the government has to introduce in light of 
ride-sharing companies that are popping up and coming around 
and people are utilizing. The public decides to utilize them, as 
that’s the wish of the public, if that’s what they want to do. And 
we know that there’s cab companies that operate and have 
operated in many of our municipalities, many of our bigger 
centres. But having said that, there’s ride-sharing companies 
that are coming up. And there’s many different ones, I think, 
are named. 
 
But I guess sometimes, having said that, I think about some of 
the people that I’ve seen, you know, even on Facebook. And 
you’ll see them: I need a ride, $5, willing to pay. And it’s kind 
of funny how someone goes and gives them a ride. And people 
do that kind of stuff, I guess, when they don’t have the money 
or whatever, choose to go that route. But I guess those 
individuals, you know, might put them in harm’s way. 
 
But here we have a government that has to pass some 
legislation. But not only that, they’re going to pass the 
legislation. And it’s important that they do, they have the 
obligation to do this, to protect our citizens that will ride and 
these companies that are starting up, but also the companies that 
are starting up to make sure that the workers and those 
operating are covered. And safety, we’ll talk about that. Now 
I’m going to get a little bit into that as we go through some of 
the comments. 
 
Now from my understanding, the government will introduce 
this Act, certain powers that they will have to do, and the 
province enacts certain powers and legislation that gives 
municipalities, you know, the opportunity, whether it’s to create 
the regulations around those companies that will be operating, 
you know, share a ride, as I talked about that. 
 
So those companies that are coming in, there’s certain 
requirements they have to follow if it’s legislated, this Act 
brought forward by government. I guess registering the vehicle, 
that will be important. They will have to do that. Obviously 



May 2, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4179 

that’s going to be through legislation, that vehicle. Also the 
government will have . . . I’m assuming that it is either going to 
be the government, and we’ll find out. I know we’ve got to ask 
some of this for clarification and some of that might be clear.  
 
But I think we want to make sure that there’s insurance, you 
know, that those individuals that choose to ride with those 
companies versus going in a taxi where certain regulations . . . 
And municipalities issue the licence, from my understanding, 
how many will be operating in the municipality. I know back 
home as well we have taxi companies, but from my 
understanding, the municipality, that’s been granted from 
legislation. And government passes that on to the 
municipalities, to say there’s certain things we’ll require you to 
do as a municipality: certain powers, you know, that the 
government passes on to municipalities to make sure that those 
taxis are licensed, to make sure those taxis report certain things 
that they have to report to them. 
 
And saying that, there could be different things. And I think 
about some of the bylaws that municipalities could enact, you 
know, is licensing around the standards, the fees, records that 
they are keeping, to make sure that they’re providing that to the 
municipality should it be requested. And I guess maybe that’s 
where someone was picked up, where they were dropped off. 
So there are municipalities with certain jurisdiction. The 
province has certain jurisdiction. And in light of, you know, 
sharing and ride-sharing companies that are starting up, the 
government’s going to bring that forward. 
 
But at the end of the day, I think Saskatchewan residents want 
to make sure that if they choose to do that . . . And I mean, 
there’s times, we’ve seen a number of them out there. In no way 
— you know, I want to make it very clear from our side — are 
we opposed to, you know, stopping that, not allowing that to 
happen. Yes, it’s going to happen. It’s there. Government has 
the regulations to do that. 
 
But having said that, we want to make sure that Saskatchewan 
residents, whether they choose to take a taxi that’s an 
established taxi company or a new taxi company or ride-sharing 
companies that are starting up, an individual gets in there and 
takes it. We want to make sure that the drivers are licensed, but 
also the insurance. But also we want to make sure — and I 
think the government has an obligation to make sure through 
legislation — that the protection is there for the drivers as well. 
 
And I start thinking about, you know, being injured when 
you’re driving somebody. And we’ve seen in the province, 
some of the taxi drivers have been injured and they didn’t have 
any coverage, some of them. And we see the families 
struggling, and those individuals. And our hearts go out to those 
individuals, and I want to say to any taxi driver that’s been 
injured, our heart goes out and our thoughts are with the 
families, you know, as they struggle to go through. 
 
But I think the industry in itself is asking for clarification, make 
sure that it’s clear. And my colleagues have asked the minister 
responsible for workmen’s comp and different areas to make 
sure that anybody who’s working in this province and doing a 
service to Saskatchewan are protected. But we want to make 
sure that those residents have a choice. And I think about it this 
way: residents of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have a 

choice. They have a choice to decide if they’re going to get in a 
taxi, if they’re going to, you know, take one of the ride-sharing 
companies. 
 
[16:45] 
 
It’s almost like when I think about members on this side, 
members on that side. Saskatchewan residents have a choice 
and they make choices. And I want to just show an example of 
choices that people have. I may choose to take a taxi. I may 
choose ride-share companies, one of the new companies. I 
might do that. That’s my choice, right? Same with, all of us 
have choices: which road we’re going to travel on, what choice 
we’re going to go in restaurants. We have a choice. 
Saskatchewan residents also have a choice on which party 
they’re going to vote for. And that’s a good thing. We have 
choices. 
 
And sometimes I’d just like to show . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . I hear them. They’re heckling. They got a lot more seats on 
that side. Go ahead and heckle. That’s fine. You can heckle all 
you want. That’s very . . . [inaudible] . . . of you. Pat yourselves 
on the back. Pat yourselves on the back. Mr. Speaker, they can 
go ahead and pat themselves on the . . . But when we see 
Saskatchewan residents and the most vulnerable suffering in 
this province, and the government backbenchers that want to 
pat themselves on the back for the great job because there’s so 
many of them over there, you go ahead and do that. 
 
I think some of you should wake up because the next election, I 
think, the next election, you’ll be sent a message. I know you 
can laugh and you think it’s all funny. The good people, Mr. 
Speaker, the good people will send a message, whether it’s in 
Saskatoon, Regina, you watch and see. There are people 
talking. They’re not happy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I just wanted to show you, Mr. Speaker, an example of 
people with choices, and that’s all I was trying to show is just 
an example with this bill, Bill 114. People will have choices on 
who they’re going to ride, but they’re also going to have 
choices, as I said, who they’re going to vote for next election. 
There’s choices, which restaurant . . . I was just showing the 
good people in this province have the choices. And if it’s a 
good company, they’ll ride with them. If it’s a good 
government, they’ll support them. If it’s not a good 
government, they won’t support them, and I think they’re going 
to get a message. 
 
But you know, take it for granted. Laugh, mock, that’s okay. 
We have heard that for a long time. That’s a tired old 
government over there, and the people of this province are 
starting to feel it and understand, the most vulnerable. So those 
individuals will have choices and they’re going to send this 
government a message when they make that choice. 
 
But having said that, I want to get back to Bill 114, to make it 
clear. But again, Mr. Speaker, I want to be clear. I wanted to 
just show that people of our province have choices. You know, 
they have choices to make. And at the end of the day the 
obligation will be on government and municipalities to make 
sure that the regulations and safety of our residents, the best 
care of our residents, when they’re to going to decide whether 
they’re getting in a taxi or ride sharing, that needs to happen. 



4180 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2018 

And this legislation will do part of that, but it also will give the 
tools to municipalities and the obligation to make sure that any 
company starting up provides insurance, to make sure the 
drivers are taken care of, make sure maybe criminal records are 
done. Making sure that Saskatchewan residents are safe — 
that’s a government. A good government would do that, and 
that’s all I was trying to show you, Mr. Speaker, when I showed 
examples of choices. 
 
But at this point, Mr. Speaker, I think I shared enough about 
Bill 114, and I just wanted to give some examples of this. And 
I’m prepared to adjourn debate and wait for this to go to 
committee to do some more good work that we need to do as, 
you know, Her Loyal Opposition. So I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m prepared to adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill 114, The Vehicles for Hire Act. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 115 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 115 — The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 
pleasure again to rise and enter into debate on Bill No. 115 
which is The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act. As the 
name might suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the Act that 
controls rental tenancies in the province, and of course is of 
particular concern to both those who rent and those who are 
landlords in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ll just go through just a brief overview of some of the changes 
that are proposed in this legislation. I’m just wondering how far 
this . . . Originally this Act goes back to 2006. There have been 
a number of changes over the years. The changes that are 
proposed with this bill: first, give landlord new powers to make 
“. . . rules prohibiting the possession, use, selling or distribution 
of cannabis or the growing and possession of cannabis plants 
. . .” Of course I think this is the third bill that I’ve gotten up to 
today to talk about that is, in part at least, necessitated by the 
changes to the federal treatment of cannabis in this country. 
 
I guess the first thought, well an overarching thought here is, 
like many bills, this is a bill that really is important to consider 
balance. You have two groups, landlords and tenants, who have 
in some ways some of the same interests, but in some instances 
opposing interests. And it’s really important that we strike a 
balance in legislation to ensure legislation that doesn’t tip too 
far in favour of one group or the other, and allows for the safe 
regulation of rental properties in the province. And that can be 
difficult, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

Of course we know . . . We can all remember, I’m sure, 
instances where, you know, difficult tenants have caused 
problems for those who they rent from. I can think of some 
fairly recent news cases out of Saskatoon. But I can also think 
of instances where renters have been subjected to some pretty 
difficult treatment as well. And that’s part of the reason why . . . 
well I guess that’s the reason why we have the office of the 
rental tenancies, formerly the Rentalsman, in this province, to 
ensure that the relationship between those two groups strikes 
the right balance, I guess, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when we look at the first change in this bill, and that is 
giving landlords the power to make rules that prohibit 
possessing, selling, or growing cannabis plants, it raises some 
interesting challenges. Of course I think on first blush it’s 
reasonable. The smoking of marijuana, or cannabis, has a 
particular odour that in multi-unit facilities I think, you know, 
it’s reasonable that there might be some concerns about that 
similar to that with tobacco smoke. And that I think is 
understandable. But this is a substance that in the very near 
future will be legal, and is a substance that people currently 
possess at times with medical licence as a prescription for 
different ailments. And I just wonder, when I see that, about 
what that means for folks who maybe do have a prescription for 
medical, or have, you know, have the right to have . . . who 
legally can possess that substance. 
 
The other thing in conjunction with some of the other pieces of 
legislation are before us, I believe currently under proposition, 
that purchasing cannabis there is a rule that you must purchase 
. . . go straight to your place of residence. So that precludes 
some, you know . . . If there’s a possibility to preclude people 
from even possessing cannabis at home and that’s the only 
place that they’re allowed to take it to, that presents an 
interesting dilemma, I suppose, for folks. So I think that’s 
something that we would have questions about, just in terms of 
how that will actually roll out and the enforceability of that. 
 
This Act also gives the Office of Residential Tenancies, or the 
ORT, hearing officers new powers to refuse to allow an 
application from a tenant who is in contravention of the ORT 
order. I think currently it stands that they can refuse application 
from a landlord who is in contravention of an ORT order, so I 
guess that is seen as a bit of a paralleling of those powers. 
 
This is an interesting one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and is 
something that immediately caught my attention. This forces 
tenants to continue to pay their rent for the duration of an 
appeals process when appealing an ORT decision to grant the 
landlord possession of a rental unit for rent in arrears. 
 
I guess I understand. I can think of a recent case where there 
was a lot of frustration on the part of a landlord who was 
continually . . . There was a particular tenant who was 
continually entering into the appeals process and that was, you 
know, causing them to be in tenancy in a particular unit for a 
long time. 
 
But on the other hand, you know, this . . . What’s being 
proposed here essentially will preclude appeals processes for 
folks who simply don’t have the money to continue to pay their 
rent from having access to appeal, which is of a particular 
concern and is something that we’ve heard from people in the 



May 2, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4181 

community. You know, if the price of admission to the appeals 
process is too onerous, it just precludes a whole group of folks 
who simply can’t afford to enter into that appeal. And I think 
that that is something that is worth our attention and 
questioning whether we’ve quite got the balance right there. 
 
Another area that is of interest, this allows landlords to dispose 
of property worth less than $1,500 without an order from the 
ORT when the tenancy ends or a property is abandoned. Lots of 
questions about this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I can think back not that long ago, working in shelters and 
thinking of the number of women who came to us with the 
clothes on their back because of safety concerns, and did have 
to abandon rental agreements, who because of safety reasons, 
for a number of reasons, you know, and maybe it wasn’t safe to 
get their things. So I guess the questions quickly here are about, 
who determines the value? Is it on individual items? Or you 
know, if someone has a collection, is that deemed to be, you 
know, item by item list of 1,500 or the whole item? And there’s 
no time period prescribed . . . for prescribing. 
 
Anyway, many questions there. I’m sure that the critic will have 
them as well. And I think that it bears some further scrutiny that 
we’re not disadvantaging folks who are already disadvantaged 
with this legislation. 
 
With that though, I know the critic is eager to get in and get 
some questions in, as are members on this side. But I think I’ve 
come to the end of my comments and will move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 115, The Residential 
Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. It being very near to the 
normal time of adjournment, this House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4151 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4151 
  Goudy ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4151 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4151 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4151 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4152 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4152 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4152 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4152 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4152 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4153 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Regina Doctor Helps Newcomers  
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4153 
 New Wellness Centre in Melfort 
  Goudy ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4153 
 Saskatoon Promenade Named After Music Icon 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4153 
 Changes Implemented Prior to Wildfire Season 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4154 
 2018 Saskatchewan Regional Park of the Year 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4154 
 Swimming Coach Selected for Special Olympics Summer Games  
  Hindley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4154 
 Royal Canadian Mounted Police Charity Ball Supports Globe Theatre 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4155 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Domestic Violence Legislation 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4155 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4155 
 Wage Rates and Affordability 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4155 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4155 
 Release of Information on the Global Transportation Hub 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4156 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4156 
 Provincial Economic Growth 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4157 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4157 
 Funding for Capital Infrastructure in the Education Sector 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4157 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4157 
 Reliability of Health Care Facilities 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4158 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4159 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4159 
 Pilot Training Program 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4159 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4160 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4160 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 81 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4160 
  Brkich (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 4161 
 Bill No. 83 — The Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4161 
  Brkich (referral to Economy Committee) ............................................................................................................................. 4165 



 

 Bill No. 88 — The Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4165 
  Brkich (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 4166 
 Bill No. 112 — The Miscellaneous Vehicle and Driving Statutes (Cannabis Legislation) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4166 
  Brkich (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 4167 
 Bill No. 126 — The Energy Export Act 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4167 
 Bill No. 129 — The Saskatchewan Technology Start-up Incentive Act  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4168 
 Bill No. 124 — The Environmental Management and Protection  
 (Environmental Handling Charges) Amendment Act, 2018 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4170 
 Bill No. 125 — The Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4171 
 Bill No. 89 — The School Choice Protection Act/Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4173 
 Bill No. 111 — The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4174 
 Bill No. 113 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4177 
 Bill No. 114 — The Vehicles for Hire Act  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4178 
 Bill No. 115 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017  
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4180 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


