


















































May 15, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 59A  TUESDAY, MAY 15, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4295 
 May 15, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce Dr. Nick 
Carleton who is seated in your gallery. Dr. Carleton is a 
professor of psychology at the University of Regina. He is also 
the scientific director of the Canadian Institute for Public Safety 
Research and Treatment, a pan-Canadian, multidisciplinary, 
multi-university team that is working to improve the mental 
health of our country’s public safety personnel. 
 
Dr. Carleton has released an online anonymous tool specifically 
to help our public safety personnel to self-screen to see if they 
would benefit from professional attention. In December of last 
year, a contract was announced with the RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] to conduct a study on the effects of 
policing on the mental health of police officers. In March, he 
also received federal funding to support the establishment of a 
new research consortium between the Canadian Institutes of 
Health Research and CIPSRT [Canadian Institute for Public 
Safety Research and Treatment] to address post-traumatic stress 
injuries among public service personnel. 
 
In the wake of the recent Humboldt tragedy, Mr. Speaker, the 
Canadian Institute for Public Safety Research and Treatment, 
the Tema Conter Memorial Trust, and Wounded Warriors 
Canada established the Keeping Them Strong campaign to 
ensure that public safety personnel who bore immediate witness 
to that tragedy get the support they need. 
 
I have Dr. Carleton here today so we can recognize this 
important and timely research. And I ask all members to join 
me in welcoming him to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I know the member 
from Weyburn will also speak to this, but I just want to give a 
quick shout-out to Landon Field who is also seated at the very 
top of your gallery way back there. Landon is here with his 
mother and grandmother. He’s an active curler. And I know the 
member from Weyburn will speak about him more, but he’s an 
all around, very engaged, active, young citizen, exactly the kind 
of citizen that we want to keep in this province. I want to 
welcome you to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 
to join with the minister to welcome these guests to their 
Assembly. Certainly welcome Landon Field to his Assembly 
here today. 
 
But it’s a tremendous honour to welcome Dr. Nick Carleton to 

his Assembly and to simply say, on behalf the Official 
Opposition and all of us in this Assembly and all of us across 
the province, thank you so very much for your leadership and 
your studies in this very important area, making sure that we 
have the supports in place for those that serve and sacrifice and 
extend support and protection for all of us. So I ask all members 
to join with me in welcoming Dr. Nick Carleton to his 
Assembly and thanking him for his leadership in his research. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I too want to rise and introduce to you and through 
you, three of my constituents that are here this afternoon. 
Obviously Landon Field has been introduced, but I do want to 
welcome Landon to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Landon is very much involved in the community of Weyburn. 
He is an avid curler. He’s a lifeguard. He is Co-Chair of the 
SRC [student representative council] at Weyburn 
Comprehensive — he’s in grade 11 — and he’s also a youth 
councillor, a member of the city council of Weyburn. We now 
have several youth positions, and I believe he’s the youth mayor 
currently at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that just scratches the surface of the things, of the 
activities, of the contributions that Landon makes in the city of 
Weyburn. Mr. Speaker, as MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly], we have an opportunity to meet with young people 
across the province and across our constituencies, and I can say 
without a doubt that in the 12 years that I’ve had the privilege 
of being in this position, Landon is one of the most impressive 
young people that I’ve ever met, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Joining Landon is his mother, Donna, as well as his aunt, 
Joanne, who is a grade 8 social studies teacher at St. Mike’s in 
Weyburn. And so I just would ask all members to join with me 
in welcoming Landon, his mother, and his aunt to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to welcome Mr. 
Bhajan Brar, Pritam Sidhu, and Harbans Singh to their 
legislature today. They are members of the Sikh community, 
and we had a great time this weekend joining in the Nagar 
Kirtan parade. 
 
And Mr. Brar in particular is very well-known around the city 
as a real leader in the community. And they also today brought 
a group of young workers and students to the legislature to talk 
about issues that are being faced in immigration, issues that are 
being faced in post-secondary education. So we thank them for 
that, and I ask members to join me in welcoming them to their 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all members of the legislature, I’d like once 



4296 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2018 

again to introduce my much better half, sitting in your gallery, 
my wife Marjorie — yes, way better — and her friend, Sandra. 
They’re actually in the city today looking to expand the 
business she’s involved in from Moose Jaw. So she’s in the city 
looking at retail space. So thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my great pleasure 
this afternoon to rise and welcome about 40 students from 
Sheldon-Williams Collegiate in Regina Lakeview. With us 
today are a group of grade 11 and 12 students who are involved 
with the leadership class at Sheldon. Of course they’re easily 
recognizable by their purple Night Light shirts. And this group 
is really defined by its good work in the community, something 
that I’ll have an opportunity to recognize in a member’s 
statement coming up shortly. But I invite all members to 
welcome this group to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And to 
you and through you, I’d like to introduce Mr. Herb Hinsburg. 
I’ve been able to get to know him in the last couple of months. 
He is a constituent of Regina Rosemont, but he also has a keen 
interest in federal politics. And Herb and I had discussions 
about making sure there’s not a carbon tax imposed on 
Saskatchewan in the next couple of years. And he’s been a big 
help to a recent endeavour of ours in Regina-Lewvan. And I’d 
like to introduce him to his Legislative Assembly, and I hope all 
members take the time to welcome him to his Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. It’s a tremendous 
honour to join with the member to welcome Herb Hinsburg to 
his Assembly, to thank him for his presence, and to welcome 
his involvement at any point on any issues that are important to 
him. So I ask all members to welcome Herb to his Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — I also would like to take this opportunity to 
welcome Herb to his Legislative Assembly. I’ve known Herb 
for probably 30 years. We were involved in the cattle business 
in 4-H together. And he’s a transplanted Manitoban, so I’d like 
everyone to welcome him to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Welcome, Herb. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
wish I didn’t have to rise to read this petition on carbon tax and 
the federal government, or any other party in this country that 
supports a carbon tax, because we know the vast majority of 
people, especially here in Saskatchewan, do not support such a 
carbon tax and the devastating effect that it would have here on 
our economy. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

That we respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly 
of Saskatchewan take the following actions: to cause the 
Government of Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps 
to stop the federal government from imposing a carbon tax 
on this province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from citizens from the 
communities of St. Walburg, Frenchman Butte, Lloydminster, 
and Paradise Hill. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition calling on the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to 
stop the Sask Party attack on our kids’ already strained 
classrooms. Those who have signed this petition today wish to 
draw our attention to the following: that the Sask Party cut $54 
million from our kids’ classrooms in last year’s devastating 
budget; and that the 2018-19 budget only restores a fraction of 
last year’s devastating cuts. And of course, Mr. Speaker, those 
devastating cuts are having an impact on classrooms all across 
the province with a reduction in the number of teachers and 
supports for students. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the government to restore the senseless cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms and stop making families, teachers, and 
everyone who works to support our education system pay 
the price for the Sask Party’s mismanagement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition to get big money out of 
Saskatchewan politics. And the undersigned residents of the 
province of Saskatchewan want to bring to our attention the 
following: that Saskatchewan’s outdated election Act allows 
corporations, unions, and individuals, even those living outside 
this province, to make unlimited donations to our province’s 
political parties. And we know that the people of Saskatchewan 
deserve to live in a fair province where all voices are equal and 
money can’t influence politics. And we also know that over the 
past 10 years, the Saskatchewan Party has received $12.61 
million in corporate donations and of that, $2.87 million coming 
from companies outside Saskatchewan. 
 
And we know that Saskatchewan politics should belong to 
Saskatchewan people. And we also know that the federal 
government and the provinces of Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, 
Nova Scotia, and now British Columbia have moved to limit 
this influence and level the playing field by banning corporate 
and union donations to political parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 



May 15, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4297 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party government to overhaul Saskatchewan campaign 
finance laws, to end out-of-province donations, to put a 
ban on donations from corporations and unions, and to put 
a donation limit on individual donations. 
 

And the people signing this petition come from the city of 
Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical workplace supports for 
survivors of domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has 
the very dubious distinction of having the highest rates of 
intimate partner violence amongst all of the provinces in 
Canada. And we know we must do so much more to protect 
survivors of domestic violence. 
 
For many who experience this violence, that violence will 
follow them to their workplace, which is why the signatories to 
this petition are calling for five days of paid leave and up to 17 
weeks of unpaid leave be made available to workers who are 
survivors of domestic violence, and that critical workplace 
supports made available to survivors of domestic violence be 
also made available to workers living with post-traumatic stress 
disorder as a result of domestic violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what those who are on the front lines of this 
crisis are calling for. PATHS [Provincial Association of 
Transition Houses and Services of Saskatchewan] and the 
YWCA [Young Women’s Christian Association] of Regina are 
just a few organizations who have been joining the cause in 
fighting for these provisions. 
 
This is what we’ve also called for in our private member’s bill, 
Bill No. 609. This is the fourth time we’ve put forward these 
provisions in this House in the last two years. It’s time for the 
government to step up, do the right thing, and pass Bill 609. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to pass legislation to ensure 
critical supports in the workplace, including reasonable 
accommodation and paid and unpaid leave for survivors of 
domestic violence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition today come 
from Regina. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Walsh Acres. 
 

Fundraisers for Humboldt Broncos Held in Regina 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, two fundraisers for our Humboldt Broncos were held 
this past weekend in Regina. First, A Game for Adam was 

played on Friday night at the Co-operators Centre. Adam was 
called up to play for the Humboldt Broncos after completing a 
successful season with the Regina Pat Canadians. April 6th 
would have been his ninth game with the Broncos. A Game for 
Adam was a chance for past and present Pat Cs to come 
together, play a little hockey, and honour their fallen teammate. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The event featured over 80 players and coaches, raffles, live 
auctions, and 50/50s. Friday’s game raised approximately 
$80,000 for the newly established Adam Herold Legacy 
Memorial Fund. Adam’s father, Russ Herold, thanked the 
crowd for this important outpouring of love, saying that “If you 
feel a tap on your shins today, it’s Adam.” Mr. Speaker, thank 
you to the organizers, players, and Pat Cs head coach Darrin 
McKechnie, along with his staff, for putting on this event. 
 
The second event, which was put on by Wheaton Chevrolet, 
called Play for Humboldt, brought in over 20 rec teams to take 
the ice for a fun afternoon of shinny while raising funds for the 
Broncos’ families. Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of playing in 
this tournament along with a lot of people that have not played 
three games in a day for a while, so I think there’s also a big 
sale on A535 as well. And it was a wonderful event and the 
hosting fundraisers did a great job. 
 
There’s a strong hockey bond that unites communities and 
families across our province, and these are just two such 
examples, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask all in this Assembly to join me 
in thanking the organizers and volunteers for putting on these 
two successful events. We are Humboldt strong. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Observance of Ramadan 
 
Ms. Mowat: — As salaam alaikum; peace be unto you. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise today as Muslims worldwide prepare for the start 
of Ramadan, which will likely begin tonight with the spotting of 
the moon. 
 
This is a holy month for Muslims across Saskatchewan and 
across the world. Ramadan is a time to reflect on and practise 
self-discipline through a month of fasting, a practice that would 
be hard to fathom for those of us who are non-Muslim. I know 
the invitations have already started coming in and many 
members on both sides of the Assembly will be attending 
Ramadan events: iftar dinners, as well as the Id al-Fitr events to 
celebrate the breaking of Ramadan at the end of the month. 
 
I want to wish community members well as they enter into this 
important month. In particular I would like to recognize the 
valued relationship I have developed with the Muslim 
community in Saskatoon, who I’ve had the opportunity to get to 
know well over the years, many of whom I have the honour of 
calling my friends. 
 
I call on all members to join me in recognizing the start of 
Ramadan and to thank Muslim communities across 
Saskatchewan for the messages of peace and welcoming they 
bring to community events. 



4298 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2018 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Merit Contractors Celebrates 30th Anniversary 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise in 
the House today and recognize a significant Saskatchewan 
association, Merit Contractors. This year Merit is celebrating its 
30th anniversary. Since 1988 Merit has paved the way for 
Saskatchewan’s open shop construction industry. The 
association provides human resource support for contractors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their membership has expanded from six 
Saskatchewan contractors to over 350 companies. To see 
Merit’s contributions to the community, look no further than the 
Merit Awards of Excellence that took place on May 4th in 
Saskatoon. I had the pleasure of presenting the award for Merit 
Employer of the Year on behalf of this government. It is 
meaningful when we can pause to recognize those businesses 
and employees among us who are going above and beyond in 
their fields, and I commend Merit for organizing an annual 
event that does just this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the construction industry is vital to our province’s 
economy. It is our second-largest private sector employer. This 
is why we work hard to provide a highly competitive, 
business-friendly operating environment that encourages 
investment and rewards innovation — to help organizations like 
Merit have the opportunities they need to succeed. 
 
I’d like to ask all members to join me in congratulating Merit 
for celebrating its 30th anniversary and thanking them for all 
they’ve done for this province. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Regina Students Launch Campaign Against 
Domestic Violence 

 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize the 
amazing work of Sheldon-Williams Collegiate students and 
teachers. For the third year in a row, Sheldon-Williams 
leadership 20/30 class is raising money and awareness, this year 
about domestic violence in our community. At the kickoff 
event, students shared moving personal accounts about how 
domestic violence has impacted their lives, and they’ve decided 
to do something about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the highest domestic violence 
rates in Canada at a rate more than double the national average. 
And students at Sheldon are taking action. Over a six-week 
period the students hope to raise $25,000 for the YWCA 
Regina, finishing the campaign with a 24-hour awake-a-thon. 
 
Raising money and engaging in social issues is nothing new to 
the Spartans leadership class. In 2016 students raised over 
$16,000 for Regina Open Door Society, and last year they 
raised over $19,000 for Mobile Crisis Regina. And they raised 
awareness, encouraging people to talk openly about mental 
health. 
 
This year’s campaign is focused on helping YWCA Regina to 
bring the White Ribbon campaign to Saskatchewan. The White 

Ribbon campaign encourages men to take action and 
responsibility in the important fight to eliminate violence 
against women and girls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the students for their activism, and 
I would like to recognize the leadership of their teacher, Ms. 
Samantha Taylor. I encourage all members to welcome them 
and encourage everyone to check out the Sheldon-Williams 
Night Light Initiative by visiting nightlightswc.com. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 

The Career of a Swift Current Community Champion 
 
Mr. Hindley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour today 
to recognize the achievements of an individual who’s done 
some amazing work for Swift Current and area. Mr. Speaker, at 
the end of June, Susie Eidem will retire as the executive 
director of Southwest Homes. Now the CBO [community-based 
organization] has offered programs and services and, most 
importantly, homes for people with intellectual disabilities in 
Swift Current and area since 1974. 
 
Susie has a background in special education and worked for 15 
years with the local school division. Then in 2001, she decided 
to make the move to Southwest Homes. Back then there was 
just one group home and a small independent living program. 
There are now several group homes in Swift Current; there’s 
day programming and other services as well. And I’d argue it’s 
all due in large part to the efforts of Susie and her team of staff 
and board members as well. 
 
When Susie started as the executive director, she said she 
wanted to see what happened on the front line, so she would fill 
shifts if there was no other staff available. Even today she’ll 
still cover for an hour or two if it’s necessary. 
 
Susie recently said what means the most to her is helping 
someone reach their dreams or achieve a long-term goal. “It’s 
not working with the numbers and budgets that’s important, but 
really working with the people, and those are the memories that 
stick out” for her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are so very fortunate in Swift Current and area 
to have someone like Susie Eidem, someone who’s dedicated 
her life to helping people with disabilities, a true champion of 
our community. Susie, congratulations on your retirement. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

33rd Annual Wild Rice Council Conference 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last month 
I had the pleasure of speaking at the 33rd annual Wild Rice 
Council conference in Prince Albert. The event was held on 
Treaty 6 territory, home of the Métis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, wild rice harvesting is an important part of our 
province’s northern economy. It’s an industry that can be found 
across the entire north of our province, from La Loche to Flin 



May 15, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4299 

Flon and everywhere in between. Saskatchewan boasts 150 
active wild rice producers, most of whom are Métis and First 
Nation. They harvest from over 20,000 acres of water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hard work and passion of these producers has 
allowed the industry to grow drastically in recent years, with 
northwest producers growing nearly half of the province’s wild 
rice. Saskatchewan is also the leading producer of wild rice in 
the country, producing 60 to 85 per cent of Canada’s lake wild 
rice annually. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank the wild rice community for the 
warm welcome and patience as I learned about the process of 
growing and harvesting the wild rice that is so vital to our 
northern industry. I ask all members to join me in 
congratulating the Saskatchewan Wild Rice Council on a 
successful conference and wish them all the best in the 
upcoming wild rice season. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Stonebridge-Dakota. 
 

Saskatoon Resident on Simulated Mission to Mars 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to acknowledge 
the accomplishments of a constituent, Doug Campbell. He’s a 
graduate student from the University of Saskatchewan and is 
currently on a simulated space mission to Mars. The simulation 
is a two-week mission at the Mars Desert Research Station deep 
in the heart of Utah. 
 
Doug is working on his master’s degree in biomedical 
engineering. He has a passion for space, and this simulation is 
one of the last steps to completing a two-year scientist-astronaut 
training program based in the United States. Mr. Speaker, 
Doug’s role in the simulation is as the science officer. He 
oversees the crew’s science work, ensuring that projects move 
along, that data is collected. 
 
His current project is a waterless dishwasher which he is testing 
as a special part of this simulation. The dishwasher uses 
ultraviolet lights, apparently to kill bacteria, and the early 
results are promising. Mr. Speaker, this machine could have 
wide-reaching effects, not only for astronauts on long missions, 
but for communities here on earth. It’s another display of 
Saskatchewan ingenuity, and I’m excited to follow along as this 
project advances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate Doug on all his 
achievements and wish him the very best. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Treatment of Former Member Regarding 
Irrigation Project 

 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, a July 31st email from a Water 
Security Agency director described a conversation he’d had 
with Bill Boyd who was seeking temporary permits for his 
irrigation projects. The director reported that he had “hopefully 
headed off Mr. Boyd on his requests.” 

This message raises troubling questions about the culture that 
Sask Party MLAs have fostered, with public servants and 
government ministers being asked to carry water for members’ 
pet projects. One such request from Mr. Boyd came to the 
Premier himself when he still minister of the Environment. The 
Premier said that he met with Mr. Boyd to discuss the project 
and that Mr. Boyd showed him his plans, but was unsure about 
the date of when that meeting took place. Has the Premier had a 
chance to look back at his calendar and identify the precise date 
of that meeting with Bill Boyd? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as we’ve discussed in this House on a number of 
times, Mr. Speaker, this was a case that was investigated by 
conservation officers, that charges were brought against Mr. 
Boyd and went through the court system, Mr. Speaker. This is 
the way that these types of situations should be handled. 
Whether a proponent wants to have an expedited process, Mr. 
Speaker, doesn’t change the process that is followed by 
officials. 
 
And frankly I’m surprised that the Leader of the Opposition 
would even raise this, Mr. Speaker, because we had the Water 
Security Agency president write to the Leader of the Opposition 
indicating that the claims that he was making in this House and 
outside of this House were incorrect, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would just say to the Leader of the Opposition, because I 
know he’s fairly new in that role: that doesn’t happen all the 
time. That doesn’t happen very often for an official to appear in 
the rotunda, for officials to appear in the rotunda and for a 
president of an agency of government to write directly to the 
Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I noticed the Premier’s 
looking through some papers. Maybe his calendar is among 
them because we did not get an answer about when that meeting 
happened between him and Mr. Boyd. So if he doesn’t know 
the exact date, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if he’d be able to tell us, 
did that meeting take place before or after Mr. Boyd travelled to 
China for his well-known March 18th meeting? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I learned of the meeting in 
China, the travel to China, through the media like everyone else 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would put forward this, Mr. Speaker: the Leader of the 
Opposition stands up and he asks questions under the inference 
or under the assumption or under the inference that somebody 
got away with something here, Mr. Speaker. And that most 
certainly isn’t the case, Mr. Speaker. In this case, Mr. Speaker, 
there was an individual that had violated provincial law, Mr. 
Speaker, under The Environmental Management and Protection 
Act, as well as under our wildlife habitat protection Act here in 
the province, Mr. Speaker. That individual was charged. He 
underwent an investigation, Mr. Speaker, as would anyone in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 



4300 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2018 

Mr. Speaker, he received four charges, pled guilty to two of 
those charges, was assessed one of the largest fines ever under 
the Act in the province of Saskatchewan, as well as his being 
ordered to rehabilitate the bank of the river, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that all of the people in the 
province of Saskatchewan can rest assured that we have 
processes in place, and everyone is treated the same, no matter 
your position in this province when you violate some provincial 
law. Mr. Speaker, I hear them chirping from their seats over 
there, Mr. Speaker. But to the people of the province, they can 
rest assured that, no matter your position in this province, you 
are treated equally. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier appears 
not to appreciate the line of questioning. It could go much more 
smoothly with simple answers. So let’s ask that list of questions 
again. Does he know when that meeting took place? Did it take 
place before or after that March meeting that Mr. Boyd had in 
China?  
 
And let’s add a question to it, maybe he can do them all at once. 
He’s got a bit of time. How about you could tell us whether or 
not during that meeting immigration was discussed at all or 
whether it was entirely about the irrigation plan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — We never discussed immigration, Mr. 
Speaker, as is being insinuated by the members opposite. And I 
don’t know the date that the meeting took place. There was no 
official meeting, Mr. Speaker. I talked to Mr. Boyd in this case 
with respect to his project like I talked to . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Do you want to listen to the answer and I’ll 
provide it to you. Like I talked to people, Mr. Speaker, in the 
Quill Lakes area with some of the proposed projects that they 
are putting forward, Mr. Speaker. Like I talked to people in 
different drainage projects across the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve put forward . . . There was, I think, 700 or 800 of those 
drainage quarters that were approved this last year, Mr. 
Speaker, one of, I think, the largest number of drainage projects 
ever approved here in the province of Saskatchewan. And I 
looked at a great many of those projects across the province, as 
people in this province would expect the minister of 
Environment or minister of Water Security Agency to engage 
with them and their community on their particular project, Mr. 
Speaker, and to ensure that they are put in touch with the 
appropriate authorities within the Water Security Agency, the 
Ministry of Environment, Mr. Speaker. This is what 
representatives in this Assembly are here to do, is to represent 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since the Premier 
doesn’t seem to be able to tell us anything about the timing of 
that meeting, I wonder if he could tell us more about its 

location. Where did this meeting take place, and was it just Mr. 
Boyd and the Premier or was he accompanied by others? Were 
any notes taken at that meeting? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, where was the time and 
location when the Leader of the Opposition and his Finance 
critic supported the Leap Manifesto? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It appears the Premier 
has lost the plot . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, the only leaps in this building 
appear to be in logic. Shall we again ask the questions, since 
there was clearly no answer. When did this meeting take place? 
Where did it take place? And was the Premier alone with Mr. 
Boyd, or did he have an assistant or another accompaniment in 
that meeting? Were any notes taken, and were any follow-up 
actions required out of that meeting? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, when the people of this 
province have a look at the Leap Manifesto and see that it wants 
to shut down agriculture, wants to shut down the energy 
industry here in the province of Saskatchewan, I think they 
want to know when the Leader of the Opposition and his 
Finance critic were when they supported that document, Mr. 
Speaker, and when they signed onto that document. That is the 
question that Saskatchewan people want to know. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, and as the Premier well knows, 
neither I nor the Finance critic nor any member on this side has 
signed that manifesto, and we do not support that manifesto. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to turn to a later meeting. A June 5th, 
quote, meeting, an unscheduled meeting between the ministries 
of the Environment and Agriculture to discuss Mr. Boyd’s 
irrigation project, which the Premier has indicated that he 
attended as Minister of the Environment. To the Premier: at 
whose request did the deputy minister to the Premier attend that 
June 5th meeting? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as has been indicated in the 
past, including by the deputy minister of Environment as well 
as a senior official — I believe the deputy minister of 
Agriculture was also scrumming in the rotunda as well as the 
president of the Water Security Agency, Mr. Speaker — 
obviously when there are cases that involve the breaking of 
wildlife habitat, Mr. Speaker, the deputy ministers would be 
aware of this. They would inform the minister, Mr. Speaker. 



May 15, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4301 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think what the deputy ministers indicated 
to the media in the rotunda is that, in a case like that, they 
would also be doing their job by informing their employer, their 
boss, the deputy minister to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the deputy ministers of those two ministries, as 
well as the Water Security Agency have indicated, Mr. Boyd 
was not treated any different than any other individual. And the 
fact that he was charged, went to court, pled guilty, and was 
fined one of the largest fines under the Act ever levied against 
an individual, shows that he was treated no differently than 
anyone else. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, trying to get a better understanding 
of the Premier’s experience at that meeting and exactly what 
happened, was there a written agenda for that June 5th meeting 
that included Alanna Koch? And were any notes taken? Were 
any minutes taken at that meeting? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Leader of the 
Opposition is coming close to the line of starting to question the 
actions of deputy ministers, the career civil servants who have 
served the people of this province for a number of years and 
have served very well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact that the deputy ministers of those ministries decided to 
inform their boss, the deputy minister to the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker, I think is an appropriate action. And, Mr. Speaker, if 
the member opposite doesn’t think that’s appropriate, I think 
that calls into question the decision making of the deputy 
ministers, Mr. Speaker. That has nothing to do with the 
ministers. Ministers are not involved in the approval process, 
Mr. Speaker. And frankly, Mr. Speaker, the ministers wouldn’t 
be involved in that process and therefore wouldn’t know that a 
meeting is required unless their deputy ministers say, we need 
to have a meeting about this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would caution the Leader of the Opposition. He’s moving 
into the territory where’s he’s starting to question the 
professional civil service in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, when the Premier was the minister 
of the Environment, were there other occasions on which he and 
his staff met with the deputy minister to the Premier to discuss 
bylaw infractions by members of the public, or was this the 
only such occasion? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, frankly I’m enjoying having an opportunity to give a 
bit of a tutorial on how government operates to the Leader of 
the Opposition. I think this is informative for him. You know, I 
understand the hopes that he has in forming of government, Mr. 
Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, the relationship between a deputy 
minister to the Premier, it’s that they are in fact the boss of the 
deputy minister to the individual ministries, Mr. Speaker. The 

deputy ministers to the individual ministries don’t technically 
report to the ministers. The minister is not the next . . . in terms 
of the leadership, it’s the deputy minister to the Premier. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, for deputy ministers to decide to bring a 
deputy minister to the Premier into a meeting, that is their 
choice. That is their call, and that is their professional decision 
making. It doesn’t involve the ministers making that call, Mr. 
Speaker. That is the decision, and in fact the deputy ministers 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It never happened? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the former minister of Environment, who by 
the way, Mr. Speaker, who in fact in estimates one time said 
how much he enjoyed the process of estimates because that was 
his time to learn how government works, that’s what he said 
after being a minister, Mr. Speaker. So I’ll take no advice from 
him. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d just 
like to canvass for a moment, the questions that we’ve asked 
today that haven’t had an answer. We haven’t had an answer 
about when or where the Premier met with Mr. Boyd or who 
attended or whether minutes were taken. We haven’t heard any 
information about the meeting with Alanna Koch and the rest of 
the deputy ministers, whether there was an agenda or whether 
notes were taken from that meeting. We have not heard from 
the Premier what the frequency of the occurrence of such sort of 
meeting, during his time as minister, would have been with the 
deputy minister or the Premier. 
 
So my question for the Premier, Mr. Speaker, is, why does he 
not want to answer these questions? What does he expect the 
people of Saskatchewan to take, to infer from his decision to 
not answer any of those questions? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve just answered 
the question. And in fact I would say, if the Leader of the 
Opposition doesn’t want to believe me in this, he should 
probably look back to what the deputy minister of Environment 
and the deputy minister of Agriculture had to say at the 
beginning of the session, when the Leader of the Opposition 
received a letter from the Water Security Agency president that 
basically said, the things that you’re saying in the House and 
out of the House are not correct, Mr. Speaker, which is quite 
unheard of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact that the deputy minister to the Premier 
was involved in this file is not a decision of the ministers, it’s a 
decision of the deputy ministers that decided to elevate the issue 
to their boss, the deputy minister to the Premier. So I would say 
to the Leader of the Opposition, his question is probably not 
well placed to the Premier, who was the then minister. The 
question is better placed to the deputy ministers of Environment 
and Agriculture, and if he would like to place that question to 
them, because they made that decision, we could help facilitate 
that any time. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 



4302 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2018 

Asphalt Disposal During Construction of Regina Bypass 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
know that the Saskatchewan Party government loves to boast 
about the most expensive 40 kilometres of highway ever built in 
the history of this great province: over $2 billion to a foreign 
consortium, French snowplows, multiple lawsuits, and 
connections to a GTH [Global Transportation Hub] land 
scandal which allowed two Saskatchewan Party government 
supporters to make a quick $11 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite even seem content with 
shelling out $2 billion in taxpayer money for farm equipment 
and heavy trucks to get stuck on the roundabouts. But yesterday 
it was made public that several months ago old asphalt was 
improperly disposed of at one of these roundabouts.  
 
My question to the minister: is this the first time that the Regina 
bypass construction has disposed of asphalt in this type of way, 
or was this the first time they got caught? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
regulations changed in 2016 on the environmental aspect of 
asphalt removal and disposal. What happened in this pit now, 
the Regina bypass partners have been notified. They’ve been 
aware of it. They’re digging that up right now. It’ll probably be 
all dug up by the end of next week, Mr. Speaker. They are 
grinding it up and reusing it in the asphalt that they’re laying 
down on the bypass now, Mr. Speaker, so they’re going to reuse 
that product. They have until November of 2018 to clean up 
that site, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Costs and Benefits of Regina Bypass 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, no question that the 
Saskatchewan people already have their doubts about this 
government and the bypass. It started off at 400 million, then 
went to 800 million. The final price tag, $2 billion. Well, 
maybe. Now we hear for the first time that the bypass 
roundabouts aren’t just for getting stuck. They also serve as a 
waste disposal area. So, Mr. Speaker, my question is, how much 
more is this going to cost the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re very proud of this project. It’s a $1.2 billion project with 
maintenance and costs incurred in that over the 30-year process 
of which, at the end of the day, we will have a new highway 
system also maintained for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a good project. This is about safety, Mr. Speaker. This is 
saving lives to people that commute into Regina to go to work 
and for people to get out of the city, Mr. Speaker. I will not take 
any advice from the member opposite who did nothing for this 
project to get to where it is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s gone to 1.2 billion because it now surrounds the city of 
Regina. It now has 11 overpasses, 33 bridges, Mr. Speaker, and 

over 40 kilometres of divided highway around the city of 
Regina for everybody to get around the city safely and for 
people to commute in and out of the city in a very safe manner 
with no level crossings and no intersections. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s been no incidents out on the east side of 
Regina since that east side of the Regina bypass has been open 
and operational. We will take no advice from the members 
opposite on highway development in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Global Transportation Hub and 
Disclosure of Information 

 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, with all the lawyers showing up 
at the GTH, it’s pretty hard to believe that everything there has 
been going according to plan. They’ve brought in a former 
deputy attorney general as Chair of the board. They’ve called in 
prosecutors from Manitoba. And the access-to-information 
squad from the Ministry of Justice is on the scene too. At the 
rate things are going at the GTH right now, it’s just a matter of 
time until the lawyers involved with this mess outnumber the 
employees at the Loblaw warehouse. 
 
And despite all the lawyers working on the file, the Minister for 
the GTH can’t seem to get his lines straight. On Thursday he 
said, “. . . at the end of the day the ultimate responsibility lies 
with government.” But yesterday he said, “. . . we do not 
interfere with the decisions that are made by the officials.” So 
which is it? Is the minister responsible for ensuring they’re 
following the law at the GTH or not? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have legislation in our 
province. We have legislation that we expect will be followed 
by all of the government services, agencies, Crowns that work 
within the province. If they need assistance from the Ministry of 
Justice, we’ll provide that assistance. We’ll do everything we 
can to make sure that the laws are complied with. We expect 
them to be complied with. The citizens expect nothing else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are gravely concerned about 
the GTH. They’re concerned about the cost of the bypass. Mr. 
Speaker, those things are great projects for the city of Regina. 
They’re great projects for the city of Saskatoon.  
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve done projects like that before. We’ve 
done joint-use schools. And, Mr. Speaker, some of the members 
opposite didn’t like some of the things that we were doing. And 
what I’d suggest they do is go and have a talk with Cam Broten. 
It didn’t work out for him very well when he criticized the P3 
[public-private partnership] school in his constituency. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister sometimes likes to 



May 15, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4303 

talk about commercially sensitive information at the GTH. But 
the Freedom of Information and Privacy Commissioner has 
already said that there is no commercially sensitive information 
in play here. 
 
His report says: 
 

I find that neither GTH nor Brightenview has demonstrated 
to my office that there are objective grounds for believing 
there is a reasonable expectation of harm if the information 
was disclosed. 

 
Does the Minister of Justice agree with the Commissioner that 
there’s no reason these documents can’t be released? Or does he 
have a different view of the law than the Commissioner? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we respect and value the 
work of the Privacy Commissioner. The Privacy Commissioner 
provides invaluable service to the province and to the 
Government of Saskatchewan. We look forward to receiving his 
advice, his recommendations. Mr. Speaker, if people aren’t 
satisfied with those recommendations, they have the ability to 
reply to the Court of Queen’s Bench. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the goal is and always should be that we 
respect the value that our taxpayers put on their dollars. We 
expect the people at the GTH to work with the Office of the 
Privacy Commissioner to be able to develop an understanding 
of what is commercially sensitive information and try and work 
to make sure that that stuff gets provided in a timely manner, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Donations to Political Parties 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
Minister of Justice wouldn’t commit to getting big money out 
of Saskatchewan politics. But he did brag, or at least he seemed 
to be bragging, about the average size of donations made to the 
Saskatchewan Party in 2017. He said the average donation was 
just $65, which is all very nice, very good. 
 
But he could make that average go even lower by supporting 
our bill on Thursday to get big money out of Saskatchewan 
politics. So when the Clerk calls his name this Thursday 
afternoon, will the Minister of Justice do the right thing? Will 
he vote yes to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we know how the 
members opposite voted. They voted with their wallets when 
they received money from John Horgan and the British 
Columbia NDP [New Democratic Party] who donated over 
$7,500. We also know how they voted when they received 
money from UFCW [United Food & Commercial Workers], 
Unifor, United Steelworkers, $35,000 from the Canadian 
Labour Congress. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we also know that they didn’t have any 

problem with corporate donations between 2010 and 2016. 
Spectra has given the NDP in BC [British Columbia] $55,000 in 
donations, and that includes a single donation of 25,000 in 
2013. But, Mr. Speaker, more interesting for the members 
opposite should be Evraz, a United Kingdom steel company 
with most of its operations in Regina, donated close to $4,000 
to the Saskatchewan NDP between 2010 and 2014. They’re a 
great corporation. We’re glad they’re there, and we’re glad 
they’re conducting business in our province, regardless of who 
they want to donate money to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Access to Deputy Ministers and 
Government’s Priorities 

 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve asked some 
questions about what appears to be an unusual occurrence: that 
meeting that brought together the deputy minister to the Premier 
with other deputy ministers. We failed to get an answer on 
whether that was something that occurred regularly during the 
Premier’s time as minister of the Environment or whether this 
was novel. The response from across the floor appears to be that 
no, that’s an everyday thing. You can meet with deputy 
ministers all the time. Access to deputy ministers to resolve 
issues for the public is a normal thing. 
 
So my question, Mr. Speaker, is, could this be an opportunity 
for us to invite another deputy minister, a Mr. Laurie Pushor, to 
come and speak to our members and answer some of our 
questions or speak to members of the media and answer what 
they’d like to know about the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, the governing members on this 
side of the House, the Sask Party governing members, Mr. 
Speaker, have the total faith and appreciation for the work that 
our public service does each and every day, Mr. Speaker, the 
work they did on this file, the work they continue to do. As well 
as we respect the judiciary, Mr. Speaker, and the decisions that 
they have come to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here we are talking about individual incidents on 
the floor of this legislature when we have challenges in this 
province, the challenge of a federally imposed carbon tax, Mr. 
Speaker. We also have challenges in ensuring that we can keep 
the unprecedented growth going here into the future, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have enjoyed over the last 10 years. And we 
have enjoyed being a net contributor through equalization to the 
nation of Canada, Mr. Speaker. We’re having challenges with 
getting our product to markets, Mr. Speaker, through pipelines. 
We have rail backlogs, Mr. Speaker, affecting the economy in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And it is now time, Mr. Speaker, for us in this province to talk 
about the half a billion dollars that we send through 
equalization to be a net contributor to the nation of Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. And I am going to lead that discussion on behalf of the 
industry, the people, and the jobs in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
I’ll be leading that discussion, Mr. Speaker, on the reform of 
equalization in here and the nation of Canada. 
 



4304 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2018 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 85, The 
Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill, Mr. Speaker, and that the 
bill be now read for the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bills on Bill No. 
85 and that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 85 — The Reclaimed Industrial Sites 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — I move that the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 85 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
Assembly ready for the question? Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 129, The 
Saskatchewan Technology Start-up Incentive Act without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 

Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill be now read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 129 and 
that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may now proceed to 
move third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 129 — The Saskatchewan Technology Start-up 
Incentive Act 

 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — I move that the bill be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 129 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on the Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to 
report Bill No. 107, The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Parks, Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 107 and 
that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



May 15, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4305 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 107 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 107 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 90, The Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in the Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 90 and 
that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 90 — The Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 90 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the House 
Services Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on House Services to report that the committee has 
considered certain estimates and is presenting its 10th report. I 
move: 
 

That the 10th report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 
 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Chair of the 
Standing Committee on House Services: 
 

That the 10th report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So the 
committees may resume work today, I now move this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this Assembly be now adjourned. Pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:30.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4295 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 4295, 4296 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4295 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4295 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4295 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4296 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4296 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4296 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4296 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4296 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4296 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4297 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Fundraisers for Humboldt Broncos Held in Regina 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4297 
 Observance of Ramadan 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4297 
 Merit Contractors Celebrates 30th Anniversary 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4298 
 Regina Students Launch Campaign Against Domestic Violence 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4298 
 The Career of a Swift Current Community Champion 
  Hindley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4298 
 33rd Annual Wild Rice Council Conference 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4298 
 Saskatoon Resident on Simulated Mission to Mars 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4299 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Treatment of Former Member Regarding Irrigation Project 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4299 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4299 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4299 
 Asphalt Disposal During Construction of Regina Bypass 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4302 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4302 
 Costs and Benefits of Regina Bypass 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4302 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4302 
 Global Transportation Hub and Disclosure of Information 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4302 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4302 
 Donations to Political Parties 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4303 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4303 
 Access to Deputy Ministers and Government’s Priorities 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4303 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4303 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4304 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4304 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4305 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 85 — The Reclaimed Industrial Sites Amendment Act, 2017 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4304 
 Bill No. 129 — The Saskatchewan Technology Start-up Incentive Act 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4304 
 



 

 Bill No. 107 — The Provincial Emblems and Honours Amendment Act, 2017 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 4305 
 Bill No. 90 — The Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 4305 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


