


















































April 26, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 49A  THURSDAY, APRIL 26, 2018, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4061 
 April 26, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave to 
make a statement regarding the National Day of Mourning for 
workers killed or injured on the job. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister’s asked for leave. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 

COMMEMORATIVE STATEMENTS 
 

National Day of Mourning 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, as part of this, the member 
for Prince Albert Northcote will be making part of the reading 
in of the names, and then I will complete it afterwards, with 
leave of course. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saturday, April 28th is the National Day of 
Mourning for workers killed or injured on the job. We will also 
be thinking of the family members left behind by those who lost 
their lives. And on that day, our thoughts will be with those 
who are dealing with workplace injuries or illnesses. The flags 
at the legislature will fly at half-mast, and throughout 
Saskatchewan and the rest of Canada many of us will attend 
vigils, lay wreaths, or light candles to honour workers killed or 
injured on the job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we should not limit ourselves to just one day to 
reflect on how workplace injuries, illness, and fatalities impact 
individuals, families, communities, and our province. We need 
to honour the memories of those we have lost by making a daily 
commitment to keeping ourselves and each other safe in our 
homes, communities, and workplaces every day. I call upon my 
colleagues in the House and everyone in the province to commit 
to doing just that. 
 
This May marks the 10th anniversary of Mission: Zero. Our 
goal is zero injuries, zero fatalities, zero suffering. Mr. Speaker, 
we are making progress. We have seen steady improvement in 
injury numbers in the province, and our rates are declining 
faster than in other jurisdictions. However, it is frustrating to 
see that people continue to suffer due to a lack of compliance 
with occupational health and safety regulations and without 
adopting best practices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] 
reported 27 workplace-related deaths in the province. Many of 
these were caused by exposure to substances such as asbestos 
many years ago. We have learned from their suffering and have 
taken measures to protect workers from such exposure. We 
need to learn from each injury and fatality to ensure that there is 
no more needless suffering. The only acceptable number of 
workplace injuries and fatalities is zero. 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members please rise while we 
read the names of those who have lost their lives: 
 
Jesse Hoehn Clifford McCoy 
Michel Ouimet Murray Workman 
Keith Stieb Randy Steininger 
Troy Lucyk Wayne Suidak 
Ted Bielecki Dale McIntyre 
Luc Charbonneau Thomas McPherson 
Wyatt Evans Gordon Watson 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite will read the next 13 names. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — 
 
Kamalpreet Cheema Budd John Aldred 
Stanley Zaharuk Sukhwinder Singh 
Adam Vanhatten Sidney Quibell 
Josh Degroot Melissa Heins 
Walter Muller Joseph Smyrski 
Daryl Ray Wanda Nesbitt 
Jack Lutz  
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I would also make 
mention of the victims of the Humboldt bus tragedy that cut 
short 16 lives. Also not included among the names we read 
were the workers who lost their lives working on Saskatchewan 
farms and ranches each year. 
 
On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I offer our 
sincere condolences to everyone who has lost someone. Our 
thoughts are also with the workers who have suffered injuries or 
illnesses because of their jobs. 
 
I would now ask, Mr. Speaker, that we observe a moment of 
silence to commemorate the Day of Mourning. 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to table two reports. The first one I’ve 
got is, in accordance with section 23(1) of The Public Interest 
Disclosure Act, the Public Interest Disclosure Commissioner 
annual report 2017, submitted by Mary McFadyen. I’ve also got 
The Ombudsman Act, subsection 38(1), The Ombudsman Act, 
2012, and we’re submitting the Ombudsman Saskatchewan 
annual report 2017. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — And I will start by recognizing we’ve got two 
guests sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. We’ve actually got the 
Ombudsman with us, so Mary McFadyen, the Ombudsman and 
Public Interest Disclosure Commissioner; and with her is Leila 
Dueck, the director of communications. I look forward to 
reading your report. Welcome to your legislature. And I’d ask 
all members to join me in welcoming them to their legislature. 



4062 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2018 

I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly, I have several guests that I’d like to 
introduce this morning. 
 
First of all, with us from the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation 
is Heath Dreger, the president of the federation; as well as 
Darrell Crabbe, the executive director. And they’re joined in the 
gallery by Ministry of Environment officials Chuck Lees and 
Jeanette Pepper. They are here in the House to celebrate the 
launch of the game management plan, which we will hear about 
a little bit later in a member’s statement.  
 
And I’d like to take this opportunity to give my thanks to the 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation for their expertise and their 
support in developing this plan. So I would ask that all 
members would join with me in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I’d also like to introduce, 
seated in your gallery, Todd Myers. He’s the director of the 
Center for the Environment at Washington Policy Center, and 
he’s joined by Todd MacKay, the Prairie director of the 
Canadian Taxpayers Federation. Mr. Speaker, these two 
individuals understand the harmful impact of a carbon tax, that 
it would have on the provincial economy while not producing 
environmental benefit. I look forward to meeting with them 
later today. And I would ask all members to help me in 
welcoming them to the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join in with the minister in welcoming his guests to the 
legislature. It’s a couple of very important topics that they’re 
dealing with the carbon issue that’s in front of us right now. 
 
As well I wanted to say a special hello to the folks in the 
Wildlife Federation. I can just see Darrell over top of the clock 
there. He’s been a real fixture with the Wildlife Federation for 
many, many years. Really good stewardship of our wildlife here 
in Saskatchewan in all the kind of things the Wildlife 
Federation does, and the president, Heath, as well, and the folks 
from the ministry. So I’d ask all members to join in welcoming 
them to their legislature. Thank you. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition calling on the Saskatchewan government to stop the 
attacks on our kids’ already-strained classrooms. Those who’ve 
signed this petition wish to draw our attention to some points: 
that the Sask Party cut $54 million from our kids’ classrooms in 
the devastating 2017-18 budget; that the 2018-19 budget only 
restores a fraction of last year’s devastating $54 million cut to 
classrooms; that even though Saskatchewan Party is making us 
all pay more, our kids are actually getting less; and the Sask 
Party cuts means that students will lose much needed support in 
their classrooms, including programs to help children with 

special needs. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the government to fully restore cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms and stop making families, teachers, and 
everyone who works to support our education system pay 
the price for the Sask Party’s mismanagement. 
 

Mr. Speaker, those who have signed the petition today reside in 
Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present another petition from citizens who are opposed 
to the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Frontier, 
Eastend, Climax, Shaunavon, and Claydon. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical workplace supports for 
survivors of domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has 
the very dubious distinction of having the highest rate of 
intimate partner violence in all of the provinces in Canada, and 
we all know we must do much more to protect survivors of 
domestic violence. 
 
For many who experience domestic violence, that violence will 
follow them to their workplace, which is why the signatories to 
this petition are calling for five days of paid leave and up to 17 
weeks of unpaid leave be made available to workers who are 
survivors of domestic violence, and that critical workplace 
supports made available to survivors of domestic violence 
should also be made available to workers living with PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder] as a result of domestic violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what we call for in our private member’s 
bill, Bill No. 609. It’s the fourth time we’ve tabled these 
provisions in the House in the last two years. Although the 
government’s picked up some other pieces of bills that we’ve 
put forward in private members’ legislation, they have refused 
to pass this particular piece. It’s time for them to step up, do the 
right thing, and pass that legislation. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 



April 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4063 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party to pass legislation to ensure critical supports 
in the workplace, including reasonable accommodation and 
paid and unpaid leave for survivors of domestic violence. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition today come 
from Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition calling for pharmacare here in 
Saskatchewan. The petitioners point out that Canada is the only 
country with a universal health care system that doesn’t include 
prescription drug coverage, and this oversight ends up resulting 
in unnecessary illness and suffering and costs our country 
billions of dollars. 
 
The petitioners point out that over 90 per cent of Canadians 
agree that we need a national pharmacare program, which 
makes total sense because one in five Canadians don’t fill 
necessary prescriptions because the medications cost too much. 
And the petitioners point out that when we cover essential 
medications, we improve people’s quality of life and save 
millions in downstream cost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to immediately support the 
establishment of universal pharmacare for Saskatchewan 
patients and advocate for a national pharmacare plan for all 
Canadians. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Nipawin Hawks Win Canalta Cup 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Nipawin 
Hawks claimed the SJHL [Saskatchewan Junior Hockey 
League] Canalta Cup Tuesday night after defeating the Estevan 
Bruins by a score of 2-1 in game seven of a tightly contested 
series. Goals by team captain Carter Doerksen and Jake 
Tremblay, and fantastic goaltending by Declan Hobbs propelled 
the Hawks to this victory. Nipawin now moves on to compete 
in the ANAVET [Army, Navy & Air Force Veterans in Canada] 
Cup against the MJHL [Manitoba Junior Hockey League] 
champions, the Steinbach Pistons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Hawks should not only be congratulated for 
their win, but praised for the way they have persevered since the 
tragic accident. Indeed we are proud of them for their hockey 
abilities, but even more for the way they have come together to 
help others and each other. After it was decided the SJHL 

playoffs would continue, the board of the Broncos said, “The 
power of healing is in the game.” 
 
[10:15] 
 
After watching the Hawks claim this victory while wearing 
green helmets in honour of the Broncos, I know this is true. The 
players from Nipawin, Estevan, and all other teams in the SJHL 
have shown the world the best of what this province has to 
offer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in 
congratulating the Nipawin Hawks and wishing them the best of 
luck in the upcoming series. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Day of Mourning 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, back in 1985 Saskatchewan 
became the first province to recognize April 28th as the 
international Day of Mourning for workers killed or injured at 
work. This is a time to remember those we have lost and those 
who were injured. It’s also a time for us to all commit as 
members of the Assembly to do everything we can to improve 
safety and supports for workers. 
 
In Saskatchewan we still have a long way to go when it comes 
to making sure everyone makes it home safe to their family at 
the end of their shift. We must work together to make sure 
everyone has what supports they need. Whether they work in a 
tower, a school, or a factory; whether they drive a dozer, a 
combine, or a taxi; whether they’re a 40-year veteran or brand 
new on the job, workers are counting on us to ensure 
workplaces are safe and supports are in place when something 
does go wrong. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in recognizing the 
international Day of Mourning, and in redoubling our efforts to 
end workplace-related deaths and injuries. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 

Provincial Game Management Plan 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the last 
three years, the Government of Saskatchewan has worked with 
stakeholders to develop a provincial game management plan. 
This plan will provide a framework to manage game species 
and their habitat, including pronghorn, upland game birds, 
moose, whitetail deer, mule deer, and elk, as well as wolves and 
bears. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hunting is an important part of our heritage, 
culture, lifestyle, economy, and social traditions. Spending time 
outdoors provides opportunities to be with family and friends. 
The game management plan outlines key considerations to 
effectively manage wildlife in Saskatchewan. The plan includes 
an overview and identifies specific actions regarding hunting 
and trapping, and identifies game species harvest principles. 
Hunters and trappers will also need to consult the synopsis to 
ensure they are familiar with quotas and hunting dates. 



4064 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2018 

Mr. Speaker, the game management plan has the support from a 
wide range of stakeholders. I wish to thank the Saskatchewan 
Wildlife Federation for their leadership role in promoting and 
supporting the development plan. I would also like to 
acknowledge the efforts of the Wildlife Advisory Committee. 
This committee represents the major wildlife conservation and 
landowner stakeholders in the province as well as the 
Federation of Sovereign Indigenous Nations and the Métis 
Nation-Saskatchewan. 
 
We look forward to working together to make the 
implementation of the game management plan a success. And 
for those that are interested, fishing season starts on May 5th. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Project Lifesaver Implemented in Saskatoon 
 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past January, 
Saskatoon Search and Rescue launched Project Lifesaver in this 
city. Project Lifesaver first started in Virginia in 1999 as a 
community-based non-profit to help law enforcement, fire and 
rescue, and caregivers quickly locate individuals with cognitive 
disorders. It is now an international organization with similar 
agencies across the United States and in six provinces in 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Project Lifesaver uses radio frequency technology 
that has been proven to reduce the time in which it takes to 
locate individuals. Clients enrolled in Project Lifesaver wear a 
small transmitter on their wrist or ankle that emits an 
individualized frequency signal. When an enrolled client goes 
missing, the caregiver notifies the local police or Project 
Lifesaver agency, and a trained emergency team responds to the 
wanderer’s area. Recovery times for Project Lifesaver agencies 
average 30 minutes, which is 95 per cent less time than standard 
operations without Project Lifesaver. 
 
Saskatoon Search and Rescue saw the success other 
jurisdictions were having with Project Lifesaver and realized 
there was a need for this kind of tool here. Over the past four 
years, the search and rescue organization has averaged 15 to 20 
calls for their involvement per year, and three-quarters of those 
calls involved individuals with cognitive disorders like 
Alzheimer’s, dementia, and autism. 
 
With the help of donors and professional volunteers, the new 
program is up and running, and on February 24th, 2018, Project 
Lifesaver Saskatoon signed up its first clients. Mr. Speaker, I 
would ask members to join me in congratulating Saskatoon 
Search and Rescue on implementing this program in Saskatoon 
and for doing this important work. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

2018 Tony Cote Winter Games 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this month, 
3,800 young athletes along with their coaches, chaperones, 
parents, and supporters were in the heart of Treaty 6 Saskatoon 

for the 2018 Tony Cote Winter Games. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was the first year that the games have been 
honoured to use the name of Chief Tony Cote who led the Cote 
First Nation in 1974 when the first province-wide games were 
held. It was Tony’s dream to create a venue for young First 
Nations athletes to compete provincially in their sport. The 
games were initially created for youth 14 years and under, and 
now it extends to 20 years and under. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Winter Games draws in nearly 10,000 people 
annually. Therefore, no reserve has the capacity to host all the 
sports and the teams that show up, so they are held in 
Saskatoon. A tradition of the games is that former successful 
athletes are present to act as role models for the attending 
youth. Three role models attending this year include basketball 
player, Michael Linklater; volleyball player, Savannah Walking 
Bear; and Olympian and member of the Canadian women’s 
hockey team, Brigette Lacquette attended the game as an 
ambassador. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also take this opportunity to congratulate my 
grandson who played for BATC [Battlefords Agency Tribal 
Chiefs] on the gold-winning bantam boys team. This young 
man possesses soft hands like his grandpa, which got him many 
goals, and he also possesses a temper like his grandmother that 
got him many trips to the penalty box. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in commending 
the organizers, participants, and the supporters of this 
successful and inspirational event. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

2017 Saskatoon Citizen of the Year 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Congratulations to 
Hugo Alvarado as the recipient of the 2017 CTV [Canadian 
Television Network Ltd.] Saskatoon Citizen of the Year. I was 
pleased to congratulate Hugo in person at the CTV Saskatoon 
luncheon held on March 29th. 
 
Hugo was born in Chile, and while attending high school in 
Santiago, he became very interested in painting and sculpting. 
Mr. Speaker, instead of pursuing art, Hugo became a civil 
servant after high school. Hugo was serving during the very 
dangerous military coup of 1973. He faced prison time in Chile, 
fighting for what his community needed: medicare, free 
education, and a better life for all. After being released, Hugo 
came to Canada in exile in 1976, and when asked by the 
embassy where he would like to go, he pointed to the middle of 
a Canadian map and chose Saskatoon. 
 
Facing many obstacles in his first years in Canada, Hugo 
decided to return to art. He has lived in his home in the 
Holliston neighbourhood in my constituency for more than 20 
years and has evolved from a young Chilean artist who came to 
this city with nothing, to one of the most recognized artists in 
Canada. 
 
Hugo has given back to his community through art auctions in 
support of the Saskatoon Food Bank & Learning Centre, the 



April 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4065 

Saskatoon Crisis Nursery, the Friendship Inn, and CHEP [Child 
Hunger and Education Program] Good Food. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all in this Assembly to please join me in 
congratulating Hugo Alvarado on winning the CTV Citizen of 
the Year. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Martensville-Warman. 
 

Support for Government Position on Carbon Pricing 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know, 
yesterday our government announced the constitutional 
reference case regarding the federally imposed carbon tax to the 
Saskatchewan Court of Appeal. Mr. Speaker, already the 
support that we’ve heard is overwhelming: Saskatchewan 
Mining Association, Canadian Taxpayers Federation, 
Agricultural Producers Association, Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business, Western Canadian Wheat Growers 
Association, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, the Saskatchewan Heavy Construction 
Association, Mr. Speaker, and the list goes on. 
 
Todd MacKay, CTF’s [Canadian Taxpayers Federation] Prairie 
director, said, “Premier Moe’s court challenge is an important 
opportunity to strip away the rhetoric and show the real 
hardship a carbon tax would impose on Saskatchewan families 
and businesses.”  
 
APAS [Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan] 
president, Todd Lewis, said, and I quote, “ Our members 
strongly believe that carbon taxes do not work for agriculture. 
The federal government have not been very clear on their 
understanding of this very basic agricultural economic reality.”  
 
CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent Business] tweeted, 
“76 per cent of Saskatchewan small business oppose a carbon 
tax. Only 8 percent support. Pleased that the Saskatchewan 
government is challenging the federal government’s ability to 
impose a costly carbon tax on the province.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope the NDP [New Democratic Party] have 
been listening and understand how completely offside they are 
with the rest of this province. Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the 
people of Saskatchewan do not want a federally imposed carbon 
tax or an NDP carbon tax, and they support our government’s 
actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of waving the white flag, the NDP should 
really be standing up for Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Asking for leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has asked leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to recognize 
some members from the United Steelworkers union here. I 
believe they’re the largest private-sector union. They’re here 
today to recognize the Day of Mourning, and so I know many 
will be attending the events also planned across the province on 
Saturday and also here in Regina. 
 
It’s a really important time for us to remember workers who are 
injured or killed on the job and committing to keeping 
everybody safe. So I want to thank you for your strong voice, 
for all the advocating that you do for your members, but not 
only your members but all workers in Saskatchewan. So thank 
you. 
 
And I also want to draw attention, I believe Wajid Ali is there 
as well. Thank you for coming today, Wajid. We know that you 
were personally affected, your family has been personally 
affected with workplace injury. And I just want you to be aware 
that thoughts and prayers are with your brother and your family.  
 
And another family member there . . . Oh, Muhammad, you’re 
here. Wonderful. Yes. Our thoughts and prayers are with you, 
you know, and your family. And we definitely keep this story 
close to our heart when we’re thinking about making sure 
workplaces are safe in Saskatchewan. 
 
And so I ask that all members of the Assembly welcome these 
guests to their Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member opposite on welcoming these individuals who 
came to the legislature today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we heard earlier, workplace safety is and 
always should be of paramount importance to everybody in the 
workplace, but in particular I’d like to thank these people who 
most recently it has become very real to them by having one of 
their members injured. And I want to thank them for coming, 
and I realize that their presence here today means that they’re 
not out working and making money otherwise. This is 
something they’re doing on their own time. 
 
So on behalf of all of the members, I want to thank them for 
being here, for raising issues that are important to workplace 
safety and important to us as a province, and would ask that all 
members join in welcoming them here today. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Support for Post-Secondary Institutes 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We all know how 
important high-quality higher education is for innovation, for 
allowing people to pursue opportunities, and for diversifying 
our economy. We learned late yesterday that Sask Polytechnic 
will lose 42 employees to layoffs and buyouts after this year’s 
budget froze the provincial operating grant at last year’s already 



4066 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2018 

reduced levels. We’ve also learned that stipends for instructors 
are being reduced. 
 
At a time when more Saskatchewan people are looking for jobs, 
when Saskatchewan industries are struggling to adjust to rising 
costs and to last year’s PST [provincial sales tax] expansion, 
how does the Premier justify these job losses at Sask Polytech 
to the people who are seeking the high-quality training they 
need to succeed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think it also alluded to, in that specific article, Mr. Speaker, that 
the changes that were being made at Saskatchewan Polytechnic 
were not due to the provincial budget, Mr. Speaker, but they 
were due to the Saskatchewan Polytechnic being responsible 
with the funds of the people of the province of Saskatchewan in 
providing the education that they . . . The members opposite 
laugh, Mr. Speaker. He should read the entire article. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to ensure that they continue to provide the class 
preferences that people are coming into, Mr. Speaker. And they 
realign each and every year, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had these 
conversations with the management at Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic, Mr. Speaker, and we continue to always have the 
conversations with our post-secondary institutes, Mr. Speaker, 
that I would put forward are funded at a far greater value, at a 
far greater investment, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of 
this province than they ever were under the NDP. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
[10:30] 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, we hear 
these kind of quotes from the Premier trying to defend these 
choices but, you know, we can’t expect a leadership whose 
budgets are under threat to speak out when they know it only 
further endangers their funding. And the layoffs and the 
voluntary severances, they speak for themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The ministers of Advanced Education and Immigration and 
Career Training wrote to the board Chair of Sask Polytech 
asking the institution to, I quote, produce 2018-19 budgets with 
“neutral to positive” impacts on government spending. To 
translate that doublespeak, Mr. Speaker, they’re asking students 
and instructors to make do with less, as we see in yesterday’s 
job losses. So I ask once again, how does this Premier justify 
squeezing Sask Polytech at a time when it’s so important that 
people have the training they need to succeed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Sask Polytech is a very strong partner for us, Mr. 
Speaker, and they also have very, very strong relationships with 
industry. Mr. Speaker, they’re very responsive to labour market 
demand and they constantly shift their programs accordingly. 
And to put this into context about why that’s so important, Mr. 
Speaker, the indigenous enrolment levels through that 
institution have risen by 53 per cent over the last 10 years, and 

Sask Poly has reported that 85 per cent of their indigenous 
graduates are employed. It’s part of the smart and, I would 
argue, effective management of that institution, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one of the things that the Leader of the Opposition failed to 
mention was that Anne Neufeld, the provost at Sask Poly, said 
in the same article in the StarPhoenix yesterday, and I quote: 
“We look at provincial labour market requirements on an 
annual basis, and then we . . . adjust our programmatic mix and 
our service delivery based on that — it’s part of our overall 
planning process,” Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Former Member and Irrigation Project Approval Process 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, job losses and higher tuition 
throughout our post-secondary education sector are really not 
an indication of an investment in the future of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in his ruling on Bill Boyd’s environmental 
charges, Judge J.D. Jackson wrote: 
 

In all of the circumstances, one would have to place Mr. 
Boyd’s efforts to comply and avoid the harm caused at the 
very low end of the diligence scale. His actions 
throughout, at a minimum, were highly reckless. 

 
From the GTH [Global Transportation Hub] to the smart meter 
fiasco, it’s hard to think of a better summary of Mr. Boyd’s 
entire time in government — highly reckless, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yet Mr. Boyd still received approvals for the project in early 
August, just weeks before he was to be charged and two months 
after the Minister of Agriculture had asked the Minister of 
Environment to hold off on approvals until the violations had 
been addressed. To the Premier: why were these permits 
ultimately issued even though the investigation into this highly 
reckless behaviour had not been concluded? Would this not also 
be an example of behaviour at the very low end of the diligence 
scale? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as I’ve indicated on a number of occasions in the 
House, in order for an individual to get a licence for an 
irrigation system, it’s a number of steps and processes that they 
need to go through — several licences and different permits, 
Mr. Speaker. A couple of days ago the Leader of the Opposition 
had this to say in the House. He said: 
 

Yet only after that tip from the public that triggered an 
investigation by a conservation officer was an 
environmental protection order issued. So why was no 
such order issued after the early June inspection first 
confirmed that that infraction had taken place? 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition apparently hasn’t 
been able to understand this yet, and in fact it’s right in the 
news release when the conviction was released, Mr. Speaker. 
These are two separate infractions. One is on breaking wildlife 
habitat land; the other was on shoreline damage to . . . 



April 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4067 

unauthorized alterations to a shoreline. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
unauthorized alteration to the shoreline didn’t happen until July. 
The WHPA [The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act] land was 
being investigated in June, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, I 
think as this case has been shown, Mr. Boyd was treated as 
every individual in this province would be treated under these 
same very circumstances. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Global Transportation Hub and Land Transactions 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party claims that they 
have the dumpster fire at the GTH contained, but really the 
flames are just getting higher. The land sale to Brightenview, 
the one that the Sask Party has been talking about for years. 
That one. The one with much fanfare. The member from 
Meadow Lake cut the ribbon for, and that very same one that 
the Sask Party used to justify their outrageous price that was 
paid to the Sask Party supporter in the infamous land flip. That 
one, Mr. Speaker. Well that land sale is no longer a sale; it’s a 
lease. So, Mr. Speaker, what happened? Can the minister 
explain how the GTH allowed this done deal to become 
undone? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we don’t become 
embroiled in the individual business decisions on a day-to-day 
basis, hour-by-hour, as the NDP would like us to do. Mr. 
Speaker, I can tell you this. Brightenview made a business 
decision to lease additional land instead of purchasing it. I can’t 
speak to Brightenview’s business plans. Those questions, they 
would have to pose to Brightenview. What I can say is that they 
had originally intended to buy 30. They actually ended up 
buying 10 acres for phase 1 of the project and are leasing 10 
acres for an additional 10 years. Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing 
any more complex or any more sinister than that. 
 
I understand that the Brightenview project is nearly complete. If 
members were out there yesterday, they would have seen the 
building is largely complete. I understand that there’s a number 
of subdivisions within it for wholesalers to use, and I think that 
those are largely rented out. But that would be once again a 
Brightenview issue. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we did go out yesterday and we 
saw Loblaw. And actually Loblaw is the one hive of activity out 
at the GTH, but it’s surrounded by empty land. 
 
We’re talking about the GTH. It was set up to do intermodal 
transport. GTH was set up to do intermodal transport. Their 
entire board of directors are experts in international trade. Are 
they going to have to let them go now and find experts in 
property management instead? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2013 the former minister, Bill Boyd, described 
the GTH as the following: “. . . a distribution and logistics 
powerhouse on the prairies.” How has the GTH gone from this 

to being a landlord, is something that this minister has to 
explain. Why is the Sask Party getting into property 
management with Brightenview at the GTH? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I am glad that the 
members opposite went out there. They saw what a success the 
Loblaw plants is. They obviously went in; they saw the workers 
that were there. Had they looked at the rest of the property 
when they were there, and I hope that they did, they would have 
seen the enormous potential that’s there. They would have seen 
a rail spur coming in. They would had seen the roadways that 
were there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we look at that project, we see jobs. We see 
a future. When they look at that, they see an empty place, a 
place to store Leap Manifestos, a place for them to store their 
outdated documents, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we don’t see it 
that way. We see this as something that’s got enormous 
potential going forward, and we hope that they do in the future 
as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Global Transportation Hub and 
Government Transparency 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday when I asked the 
government to finally allow Laurie Pushor to answer questions 
about the GTH land deal, the Minister of Trade said, “He’ll be 
attending estimates with the Minister of Energy and Resources, 
and at that point will be there to support the minister in 
responding to questions . . .” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when Mr. Pushor appears at committee with 
the Minister of Energy, will the Minister for Energy and 
Resources allow him to answer questions about what went 
down at the GTH? Will Laurie finally be free? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again I think we’ve 
canvassed the issue on the floor of the Assembly for the last 
number of days about how estimates work. And I think 
members both on this side and that side now have had enough 
experience to understand how estimates work. 
 
Ministers will go and they ask for a period of time for estimates 
for particular ministers. I had four hours on Monday night. 
There’ll be some ministers who will be there for longer, some 
for shorter. We work across the floor with members opposite to 
schedule that. Officials attend with their minister to whom they 
report. They answer questions, support their minister in 
responding to questions which are posed with respect to the 
estimates that are in front of them. And that’s how it will 
continue to work going forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the 



4068 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2018 

minister opposite for mansplaining how estimates work in this 
Assembly. But, Mr. Speaker, the question wasn’t for . . . the 
question wasn’t for the Ministry of Trade . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Just mind, mind your comments. You know 
full well. I recognize the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — I’d like to thank the Minister for Trade for 
explaining to us how estimates work here in this Assembly, but 
the . . . in a very condescending way, I may add. But the 
question was directly for the Minister of Energy and Resources, 
because she is the one that will be presiding over those 
estimates when Mr. Pushor will be in the committee room. So 
the question is for the Minister of Energy and Resources. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well you know, Mr. Speaker, we have 
talked about, across the floor, the nature of estimates. I think 
we’ve explained and had discussion and, you know, I’m not 
seeking to sound condescending, Mr. Speaker, but I know the 
members opposite are aware of how estimates work. I know 
that the member, as a former opposition House leader, is aware 
of the nature of estimates. 
 
I would point out as well, Mr. Speaker, that, I mean, it’s a 
serious matter. We were, on Monday night for instance, 
approving and reviewing over $250 million of expenditure. 
Members opposite, I think I would say, traditionally have taken 
those estimates seriously. I know numbers of members over 
there who absolutely do take it seriously, but we have had 
instances where members attempt to grandstand and attempt to 
score political points. That’s not the place for doing so, Mr. 
Speaker, in my humble opinion. But that’s what we saw from 
that member, the Leap supporting . . . the Leap Manifesto 
supporting member for Saskatoon Nutana who I tried to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Mental Health Services for Children 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Earlier this week, the Minister for Rural and 
Remote Health implied there would be supports for kids 
struggling with mental illness in the new children’s hospital. 
But we know there will not be a pediatric psychiatric unit in the 
hospital when it opens. And these kids, unlike other kids 
grappling with illness, will not have the opportunity to heal in 
the new facility. Children’s hospitals across the country have 
pediatric psychiatric units for children, but Saskatchewan kids 
in the same spot will remain in the Dubé Centre. 
 
At a time when we should be combatting stigma and making 
kids suffering with mental illness feel no different from their 
peers, will this government reconsider and include a pediatric 
psychiatric unit in the new children’s hospital? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 

member for the question. Of course she realizes and I think she 
believes that children’s mental health is very important to this 
government. And the decision to have the program, or to have 
the services delivered in this way is not a decision made by the 
government, Mr. Speaker. It’s a decision made by the 
individuals, the professionals that were designing the new 
children’s hospital and looking after the best interests of these 
children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The services that are available, all the professionals — social 
workers, mental health professionals, psychiatrists — can 
access and will access those children through those 10 beds in 
the Royal University Hospital, Mr. Speaker. But those services 
will also be available to move over when the need arises to 
service children in the new Jimmy Pattison Children’s Hospital. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The only kids not in the new children’s 
hospital are those with mental health issues, Mr. Speaker. We 
know that Dubé Centre’s child and adolescent unit does good 
work, but we also know that the adult side is chronically over 
capacity and those 10 beds could be used to provide additional 
space. Kids needing mental health supports should be treated 
the same way as their peers and benefit from the new facility. 
Child psychiatrists say this decision makes their work more 
difficult, and how heartbreaking it is for them to tell families 
their kids will be the only kids not treated there. The separation 
just further entrenches the stigma of mental health, something 
we’re all trying to combat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been asking for this change for years, and 
over that same time this government claims they have been 
trying to do better for Saskatchewan kids. Well here’s the 
opportunity. Will the minister commit that children needing 
mental health care will have a place in the new children’s 
hospital? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Children 
will be served in the Dubé Centre in the 10 beds that are 
specified for their care. And as I said, Mr. Speaker, children that 
are in the children’s hospital needing mental health supports 
will also have those supports that are also available in the Dubé 
Centre in the RUH [Royal University Hospital] Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I would also point out that we are doing more, as reflected 
in the advocate’s report, about a more reactive and more 
responsive service for and care for mental health patients, in 
particular children, Mr. Speaker. That is why the new 
emergency department in . . . the new Dubé mental health unit 
that is opening in the emergency department to be more 
responsive to mental health patients, that will be moving into 
the new Jimmy Pattison Children’s Hospital emergency 
department, Mr. Speaker, will have specific space there for 
those children coming in for emergency services that can be 
treated right there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:45] 
 



April 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4069 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Support for Capital Infrastructure in 
the Education Sector 

 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party had a decade-long 
run of record revenue, and anyone who’s walked through St. 
Pius elementary school can tell that they’ve squandered it. After 
a decade of prosperity built by the hard work of the people of 
our province, our kids deserve so, so much better. Leaking 
roofs, warped floors, closed-off classrooms, and falling ceiling 
tiles — it’s simply unacceptable. How is it that after a decade of 
prosperity that students in Saskatchewan are being forced to 
learn in such unacceptable conditions? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I find that question to be 
remarkable. For this party on this side of the House to take 
lessons from the New Democrats when it comes to educational 
capital, Mr. Speaker, is ridiculous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had some great success with respect to 
ensuring that we’re providing the educational environments for 
students in our classrooms, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, let me 
just give you some numbers. We’ve opened 40 new schools in 
this province, Mr. Speaker, over the 10 years, something we’re 
very proud of, including last year, Mr. Speaker, the largest 
capital infrastructure in the education sector in the history of 
this province, Mr. Speaker. And we’re very proud of that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’ve also increased, Mr. Speaker . . . We have emergent 
funding, $25 million, Mr. Speaker, in this year’s budget to deal 
with emergent needs, Mr. Speaker. None under that side, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve got $179 million in preventative maintenance 
and renewal, Mr. Speaker, up 15 per cent over last year, Mr. 
Speaker, something that the school divisions have been very 
happy to receive, Mr. Speaker. None under that government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
If we were going to take a lesson from the New Democrats, Mr. 
Speaker, we’d be closing 176 schools instead of building 40 
new schools, Mr. Speaker. More to come, more work that we 
need to do, Mr. Speaker, but we’re committed to doing it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the minister likes to talk about the 
joint-use schools but he forgot to mention that the school in 
Harbour Landing is already over capacity and there is no plan to 
deal with it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to new schools, in the Sask Party’s 
budget the funds for replacement schools simply are not there. 
Boards need to know if they should put a new roof on their 
aging schools or if they have the support that they need for a 
rebuild. There’s no predictability for boards and there’s no plan 
to replace aging schools, like St. Pius, all over our province. 
There’s only one thing that’s predictable, Mr. Speaker, and that 
is that the money won’t be there. When will the Sask Party 
come up with a transparent and predictable plan that takes care 
of growth and replaces these aging schools? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, we opened 20 new schools 
last year in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
remarkable, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to continue to have 
conversations with school boards. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, our 
commitment with respect to preventative maintenance and 
renewal, Mr. Speaker, our commitment with respect to 
emergent funding is helping with the needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and specifically with respect to St. Pius, I want to 
quote the director of education from the Catholic school 
division. He said: 
 

It’s safe for students and staff to attend in a learning 
environment in the condition of the school. We test it 
regularly to make sure that the safety standards are up to 
scratch so that we don’t have concerns there. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s from the director of education, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ll continue to work with our school divisions, Mr. Speaker, 
make sure that they have the resources available to maintain 
schools. In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue 
with the capital plan, Mr. Speaker. We have more to say about 
that, more work to be done in this sector obviously, Mr. 
Speaker, but this government’s committed to it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Commercial Development in Wascana Park 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the good people of Regina just 
love Wascana Park. Have a look out the window or out the door 
this day, Mr. Speaker, and you’ll see how true that is. But 
people also know that when it comes to Wascana, they just 
can’t trust the Sask Party. 
 
A year ago the Sask Party took over control of the Wascana 
Centre Authority. We asked written questions about the impact 
of development in the park because people had concerns. The 
answers show that the office tower plan for the replacement of 
the CNIB [Canadian National Institute for the Blind] building 
shows that the square footage will increase by nearly four times 
as much, and they plan to nearly double the amount of surface 
parking. 
 
That’s right, Mr. Speaker. They plan to take a larger share of 
the people’s Wascana Park paradise to put up an even bigger 
parking lot. To the Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission: how does that make any sense? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I thank the member for the question. As the member 
knows or should know, commercial development has always 
been possible in Wascana Park. The CNIB building was built in 
the ’50s, and the CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] 
building is there as well. They do follow very stringent and 
strict guidelines, and the Provincial Capital Commission 
oversees commercial developments within the Wascana Centre. 
 



4070 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2018 

Now let’s talk specifically about the building the member 
mentions, the CNIB. Mr. Speaker, I submit to you the clients of 
CNIB, where better to serve those clients than in a park in the 
heart of Regina, Wascana . . . [inaudible] . . . I think it’s well 
served and I think it’s work that’s being well done and certainly 
overseen. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, we know that this government is 
so excited about the plans they have for Wascana Park that they 
took the responsibility of it away from a Regina minister and 
put this jewel of the city of Regina in the hands of a minister 
from Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, the duck-and-cover routine is 
pretty clear. 
 
So I guess for the minister, I have the following question: given 
that this is now another large-scale commercial development on 
tap for the . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll remind the member that all members are 
honourable, so I’m sure they take their jobs seriously. Period. I 
recognize the member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Well thanks for the reminder, Mr. Speaker. In 
terms of this government taking over control of Wascana Centre 
Authority, tearing up a tripartite agreement that’s been around 
since the ’60s, Mr. Speaker, how is it that we’ve got the 
large-scale commercial development cranked up with a 
cash-strapped, desperate government presiding over a fire sale? 
I guess my question to the minister is this: what’s next? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Central Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been a member 
of this legislature for quite some time, and I don’t know if I’ve 
heard such a ridiculous statement. I am not a minister for 
Saskatoon. I am not a minister for Regina. I’m a minister for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Every member of this House, every member of this House 
should be proud of Wascana Park. We should be proud of the 
Provincial Capital Commission. In fact that is where we come 
to work every day, in this park, and it’s part of the Capital 
Commission. So I think the member opposite should be 
embarrassed by that statement. 
 
More importantly though, we will continue to do the good work 
to ensure that the CNIB building is refocused and is enabled to 
serve those clients that much need that help, and we will do so 
in a manner that follows some strict and stringent guidelines, as 
we’ve done in the past. And we’re very proud to do so, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In terms 
of what this government has presided over, Wascana in 
particular, let’s review. They took a tripartite agreement that 

had been around since the ’60s — which successfully shared 
the power between the university, the city of Regina, and the 
province — and took it over so that they have a majority control 
on the board. And when this was going on, Mr. Speaker, no 
lesser person than a former, a former candidate for that party 
said that in terms of the budget and the move that that came 
with, that candidate said that the budget had come like a thief in 
the night, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what the plans were for 
Wascana Centre. And it wasn’t too long after that that they took 
over control of the board. 
 
So I guess my question again is this, Mr. Speaker. In terms of 
their plan for the ongoing fire sale with which they’re 
approaching Wascana Centre, what’s next? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, more ridiculous 
comments by the member opposite. The Provincial Capital 
Commission is governed by a board that has many capable 
individuals on it, some members from Regina that are here as 
well, and others that have interest in the entire province. 
 
Wascana Centre had a master plan in place since 1913 to guide 
development such as this, uses in the park. The master plan will 
continue to guide the development of structures, infrastructures, 
and landscapes throughout the park now and into the future, Mr. 
Speaker. And again all members should be very proud of one of 
the jewels of Saskatchewan that is an interest to all MLAs 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] from every constituency 
in Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Need for Pharmacare 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to . . . At the end of my 15 minutes, I’ll be moving a motion: 
 

That this Assembly calls upon the federal government to 
move beyond words and fully fund a national pharmacare 
strategy so that all Canadians will be able to afford their 
prescription drugs. 

 
You’ve got me for 15 minutes, Mr. Speaker. We’ll see how 
long . . . or how my voice does here today. 
 
So I can tell you as the Health critic, Mr. Speaker, one of the 
issues that presents most often in my office is the struggle that 
people have in paying for their prescription drugs, whether it’s 
the day-to-day drugs — people managing their diabetes 
treatments — or actually more difficult situations or issues 
around some of the orphan drugs for illnesses like cystic 
fibrosis, Mr. Speaker. And I know even last summer, Mr. 
Speaker, or last budget when the government was initially 
going to add PST to health benefits, people who purchased 
health benefits, I heard from many seniors who buy health 
benefits to provide that extra coverage for themselves for 



April 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4071 

things, including drugs, that this was going to be an additional 
burden to them to be able to access their medications. And I 
heard from employers and organizations who were concerned 
about the PST on their health care benefits and that would cause 
them to not be able to afford the drugs, Mr. Speaker, or to 
provide a robust employers’ plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Anyway, I was glad to see the government roll that back. To see 
that adding 6 per cent PST to health insurance was, quite 
frankly, unhelpful and a harmful idea, Mr. Speaker. I have to 
point out that pharmaceuticals are so essential to health and 
well-being that the World Health Organization has declared that 
access to essential medicines is a human right. The WHO 
[World Health Organization] recommends countries protect that 
right in law and with pharmaceutical policies that work in 
conjunction with their broader systems of universal health 
coverage. 
 
Consistent with those WHO recommendations, every developed 
country, Mr. Speaker, every developed country with a universal 
health care system provides universal coverage of medically 
necessary prescriptions, except Canada, Mr. Speaker. We’re the 
only country. Millions of Canadians have no drug coverage at 
all, and millions more have coverage that is inadequate to 
ensure access to medicines. As a result, almost one quarter of 
Canadians report they or members of their household have not 
taken medicines as prescribed because of costs. 
 
And again, that is, with respect to Saskatchewan . . . Actually, 
I’ll point something out here in a moment. According to a 2015 
Angus Reid survey, 20 per cent of respondents in Saskatchewan 
said they or someone else in their household hadn’t taken 
medications as prescribed because they couldn’t afford to. 
Again, as the Health critic, Mr. Speaker, I hear that in my office 
frequently: people making the decision between taking 
medications or choosing to pay rent, choosing to pay power 
bills, to put food on their table, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker. That 
is a very real choice. 
 
And sometimes not only are patients not filling their 
prescriptions, but they will take managing them into their own 
hands and they’ll ration, which is not good for them or their 
health, but can wind up with them ending up in the emergency 
room, Mr. Speaker. We have increased waits in our emergency 
department, and I would argue in part it’s because people don’t 
have the ability to manage their chronic illnesses and take their 
medications regularly. 
 
The 2016-17 budget resulted in 66,000 families with children 
and 120,000 seniors paying more for medications because of 
drug plan increases from this government, Mr. Speaker. I just 
actually want to point to this government’s record on, generally 
speaking, with respect to coverage of drugs. So when it comes 
to seniors, in 2007 when this government came to power, there 
was a program that saw seniors over 65 would pay no more 
than $15 for prescriptions under the Saskatchewan formulary. 
So low-income seniors who got the GIS [guaranteed income 
supplement], SIP [Saskatchewan Income Plan], or special 
support coverage, who pay less than 15, would continue to do 
so. So that was under the previous administration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:00] 
 

When the Sask Party came to power, they added an 
income-tested component to that, which created a problem for 
some seniors for sure, Mr. Speaker. But along the way here . . . 
So the copay was . . . or it was a $15 limit, Mr. Speaker, and 
then the Sask Party raised it to 20, and then in the ’16-17 
budget, they added another $5 for seniors to pay. But along the 
way there, actually, they also increased the income threshold. 
They changed the income threshold that determines eligibility 
for the seniors’ drug plan, lowering it from the federal age 
credit to the provincial age credit. So July 1st, 2015 the 
threshold went from 80,255 to less than 65,515 or less. So back 
in 2015, that saw 6,000 seniors removed from the drug plan. 
 
We’ve also, as I said, pointed out in this budget that there were 
cuts to the family drug plan as well. And I also need to point out 
it’s not just been direct cuts to the plan that has been a problem. 
The Saskatchewan employment supplement, which is 
something meant for low-income families, the working poor, 
Mr. Speaker, which is a real issue because they’re often not 
covered by private health benefits. But under this government, 
Mr. Speaker . . . I’m just going to look at my notes here. In the 
2016-17 budget again, they changed the Saskatchewan 
employment supplement, which helps the working poor, 
particularly single-parent families. They moved from, they say, 
targeting those most in need by providing money for children 
over age 12, but those who were already getting the assistance 
for older children were grandfathered and retained the 
assistance. But then they eliminated the grandfathering to save 
the province money, the government said. 
 
So the thing that the access to the employment supplement 
does, it also allows you to access family health benefits, Mr. 
Speaker. So they kicked families off of that particular program 
as well. So it’s important to point out . . . So their track record 
around medications, let alone pharmacare, but their track record 
around cost of medications has not been great, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In Saskatchewan even publicly funded programs require 
copayments or deductibles, which has been proven to reduce 
access, Mr. Speaker. According to the Journal of the American 
Medical Association, even charges as low as $2 have been 
found to be a barrier to taking medication as prescribed. And I 
can tell you that copays are much more than $2 for lots of 
people. The family health benefits of which I was just speaking 
. . . So parents or legal guardians covered under family health 
benefits receive drug coverage with $100 semi-annual family 
deductible and 35 per cent consumer copayment thereafter. And 
children would get covered if you were under family health 
benefits program from which they removed members, Mr. 
Speaker. So even copays result in people skipping medications, 
not filling prescriptions, and being less healthy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Canada’s patchwork of private and public drug plans leaves 
millions of Canadians without coverage. As a result, studies 
show Canadians are three to five times more likely to skip 
prescriptions because of costs than are residents of comparable 
countries with universal pharmacare programs. 
 
It is well documented that financial barriers to necessary 
medicines result in worse health for patients either because they 
aren’t receiving proper treatment or because they have to give 
up the other necessities, such as food, to pay for drugs. Failing 
to manage chronic illnesses like diabetes or hypertension can 



4072 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2018 

lead to further complications and hospitalizations and result in 
unnecessary increases in the use of hospital and medical care. 
 
I know that in this last budget, one positive move this 
government finally made was fully funding HIV [human 
immunodeficiency virus] medications, Mr. Speaker, after being 
prodded by many people, the opposition included. And I know 
talking to my colleague, the Leader of the Opposition, in his 
own medical practice, the 7 per cent or so of people who 
weren’t covered, the working poor who weren’t covered under 
the previous programs, Mr. Speaker, he talked of people 
rationing their medications, and then they become less 
effective, which isn’t good for the individual and it isn’t good 
for the overall system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Meanwhile, the proportion of our health care budgets, both 
public and private, going to cover drug costs continues to rise. 
This leaves insurers, both public and private, little alternative 
but to reduce coverage to save money. We are paying even 
more and getting even less. I mean, and I’ve talked at the 
beginning of my comments about this government’s plan last 
year that they’ve thankfully changed their mind on, but the 6 
per cent PST on health benefits, Mr. Speaker, or health 
insurance, was ridiculous. 
 
I talked to many employers who pointed out that they would, 
under that circumstance, be able to provide their employees 
much less. And I talked to employees who were very concerned 
about their own drug coverage or coverage of other health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ensuring universal access to medically necessary 
prescription drugs is not only the right thing to do; it can also be 
the financially responsible thing to do. Research shows that 
Canadians spend 50 per cent more per capita on 
pharmaceuticals — 50 per cent more per capita on 
pharmaceuticals — than residents of the United Kingdom, 
Sweden, New Zealand, and several other countries with 
universal pharmacare programs. This amounts to spending $12 
billion more each year and still not having pharmacare. 
 
Because universal pharmacare programs in other countries use 
their purchasing power to obtain better drug prices than our 
fractured system. Among many other examples of such price 
differences: a year’s supply of atorvastatin, a widely used 
cholesterol drug, costs about $143 in Canada but only $27 in 
the United Kingdom and Sweden and under $15 in New 
Zealand. 
 
Pharmacare is achievable and financially viable. Every 
comparable universal health care system in the world proves 
that this is the case because they all provide better access to 
medicine for less than Canada now pays. A universal public 
pharmacare system, one coordinated across provinces in ways 
similar to how federal, provincial, and territorial governments 
purchase vaccines and blood supply products, would achieve 
equity-of-access goals while saving Canadians between 4 
billion and $11 billion per year. 
 
Collaboration between the provinces and the federal 
government on a pharmacare program that included a shared 
formulary, a single bulk purchaser of drugs, and clear 
guidelines around both cost and medical effectiveness could 
save Canadians billions of dollars best spent elsewhere in the 

system. Comparable countries that integrate drug coverage into 
their universal public health care system achieve more equitable 
access to medicines at far lower total costs than Canada spends 
on our system today. 
 
Saskatchewan businesses would benefit from a pharmacare 
program. The rising cost of pharmaceuticals are a growing 
burden for businesses. Part of the problem is that Canadian 
employers waste between 3 billion and $5 billion per year 
because employment-related private insurance is ill equipped to 
manage pharmaceutical costs effectively. Another part of the 
problem is that the number of prescription drugs costing more 
than $10,000 per year has grown almost tenfold in the past 
decade. Because such costs can quickly render a work-related 
health plan unsustainable, particularly for small businesses, it is 
best to manage them at a province- or a nation-wide basis. 
 
A recent national survey by the Angus Reid Institute found that 
a vast majority of Canadians — 87 per cent — support adding 
prescription medications to Canadian medicare. This support 
exists equally in terms of regions, age groups, incomes, and 
education levels. Universal public pharmacare is also supported 
by health professionals, unions, policy experts, businesses, 
citizen groups, health charities, health executives, 
municipalities, and provincial governments. 
 
Public spending in Saskatchewan covers roughly half the cost 
of prescription medicine. An estimated one in three of the 
province’s 573,700 workers — 191,233 — don’t have health 
benefits, according to the Wellesley Institute. In Canada, only 
about 27 per cent of part-time workers have prescription drug 
coverage. Those are incredibly vulnerable people, Mr. Speaker. 
That means that about three-quarters of Saskatchewan’s 
100,900 part-time workers don’t have prescription drug 
coverage. This patchwork coverage leaves many in 
Saskatchewan without access to the medication they need either 
because they don’t have a prescription drug plan or have plans 
that don’t cover the cost. 
 
This patchwork of insurance coverage and non-coverage that 
exists for prescription drugs is one of the biggest failings of our 
health care system in Canada. The very poor, the unemployed, 
the unemployable, the elderly, and sometimes children are 
picked up by a mix of provincial programs, also with varying 
degrees of quality. And gaps between public and private 
coverage can mean those with chronic drug-dependent 
conditions or those faced with catastrophic illnesses are often 
saddled with huge out-of-pocket expenses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have got much more to say, but I see that my 
time is near for . . . I’m running out of time here and need to 
move my motion. 
 
I would like to move: 
 

That this Assembly calls upon the federal government to 
move beyond words and fully fund a national pharmacare 
strategy so that all Canadians will be able to afford their 
prescription drugs. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 



April 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4073 

Saskatoon Riversdale: 
 

That this Assembly calls upon the federal government to 
move beyond words and fully fund a national pharmacare 
strategy so that all Canadians will be able to afford their 
prescription drugs. 

 
Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt? I recognize the Provincial 
Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you. Thank you for the 
opportunity to take part in this debate on the opposition’s 
motion. However, my sympathies to the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale on her sore throat today. No pun 
intended, but there’s probably some good drugs out there that 
would help you. 
 
So the motion for the opposition is: 
 

That this Assembly calls upon the federal government to 
move beyond words and fully fund a national pharmacare 
strategy so that all Canadians will be able to afford their 
prescription drugs. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that would be lovely, but at what price? 
How many discussions? And what is the plan? We cannot 
support the motion until we have a clear picture, clear 
indication that the federal government would be a full funding 
partner. 
 
Saskatchewan does have one of the most comprehensive drug 
plans in Canada, and one that our government is proud of. And 
that saying, we are always open to ideas, Mr. Speaker, to give a 
better quality of life, to give a better quality of life for all 
Saskatchewan citizens from north to south, from east to west on 
this vast, beautiful province. So we are, yes of course we are 
open to ideas. We want to work for the good of the people, but 
we also need to continue to educate ourselves. And we are open 
to recommendations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our people are our most valuable asset, but for 
democracy to work we need to serve and we need to represent 
our people with open minds. But reason serves we need a better 
understanding of what this pharmacare will be. We do have an 
obligation to protect Saskatchewan citizens and the 
sustainability of this proposed strategy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will gladly have discussions, but we’re not 
prepared to endorse as yet what we don’t know. We want the 
feds to fully fund this partnership, and we are not opposed, but 
we need satisfaction. And one of the concerns is the high cost of 
drugs. We’d be very hopeful in the discussion of making . . . 
that the drugs would be more affordable. But it’s not logical, 
Mr. Speaker. How do we endorse something we don’t know 
about? 
 
But in talking about the budget — I was listening intently to the 
member from Saskatoon Riversdale — she was saying our 
health care, the budget didn’t give enough to the people. So I’d 
like to put on record our 2018-19 budget invests a record 5.36 
billion for the Ministry of Health.  
 
We’ve got funding. A 2.8 million investment will fulfill 

government’s commitment to provide individual funding for 
children with autism spectrum disorder. A 600,000 investment 
will provide universal drug coverage to HIV medications for 
those in need. Fifty thousand for AIDS [acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome] in Saskatoon, and an additional 50,000 
for Saskatoon’s Westside Clinic to provide HIV supports for 
those in need, Mr. Speaker. We also have a 523,000 investment 
to create universal newborn hearing screening program to 
provide babies born in Saskatchewan with a screening test. We 
also have a commitment to the Canadian National Institute for 
the Blind for vision loss rehabilitation services and equipment 
with a funding of $500,000. 
 
[11:15] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to helping 
people. We all want the best for the quality of life for 
Saskatchewan people. We want the best health care. We want 
the best drug plan for our families and our communities. In the 
2018-19 budget, over 99 million in capital funding. Over 99 
million, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this will help the quality of 
life for Saskatchewan people.  
 
So we are open to ideas and suggestions, but we also need a 
commitment in funding and satisfaction in a full funding 
partner. Back in our 2016 budget, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency received more than 167 million 
in funding, and this was a substantial increase in funding and it 
helped pay for the addition of 14 new cancer drugs that were 
approved. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the health budget included funding to fulfill 
the government’s campaign commitment to expand its 
advanced remote presence technology to our northern 
communities in Saskatchewan. And this project allows health 
care professionals to be virtually present with patients and 
provide real-time assessment, diagnosis, and patient 
management. That, Mr. Speaker, is an incentive to helping 
people in northern Saskatchewan, helping change lives for the 
better, and enhancing the ability to live in our more isolated 
communities and still have a good quality of health care. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, implementing a national pharmacare 
plan would be very complex and something some of our 
provinces and territories would be unlikely to consider in the 
absence of a partnership with the federal government and 
federal funding. Now this topic has been discussed for a number 
of years with other provinces discussing their needs. And our 
problem is, what is the uniformity of it? Will it be right across 
Saskatchewan statistically by numbers? So there is a number of 
things that we are wondering about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s interesting to note that discussions about national 
pharmacare have existed for decades; in fact the federal 
Liberals first included it in their 1997 platform. However the 
discussions have always stalled due to the lack of federal 
willingness to entertain funding. Now Saskatchewan is open to 
the idea of a national pharmacare program. We’re not saying it 
isn’t. But we are hopeful for more affordable medications for 
those in need, but again we also need satisfaction and answers 
and commitments. And the question is, how as a province do 
we endorse something we don’t know enough about? We’re 
obligated as a government to protect, understand, and need . . . 



4074 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2018 

of how this is going to work for the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do understand the cost of prescription 
medications can be a financial burden for individuals and 
families, and we understand the pressures facing young 
families, students, and seniors across the province. But I do 
applaud all involved for helping those in need and making 
Saskatchewan stronger, and we’re very proud of some of our 
initiatives. 
 
Saskatchewan’s drug plan offers comprehensive coverage to 
residents and is one of the best in the country. In fact the public 
share of total prescription drug spending varies among the 
provinces. Saskatchewan has the highest with 48 per cent, and 
New Brunswick has the lowest with 29 per cent. So our 
provincial government has special programs to assist seniors, 
children, residents with low incomes. And we are a growing 
province, and by working together we will help Saskatchewan 
people get through. We also continue to partner with other 
jurisdictions through the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance 
to make medications more affordable for patients. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I do understand the need for life-changing 
medications and prescriptions that give a better quality of life to 
children and our seniors. And I know the need of life-saving 
drugs to help our Saskatchewan people breathe better or process 
sugar or lower cholesterol. People with heart disease or 
leukemia, these medications and drugs do give you a chance. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we currently have a large number of programs 
that provide comprehensive coverage to Saskatchewan 
residents. And we as a society have a deep-seated need to 
relieve pain and suffering, so we do have the children’s drug 
plan and palliative care and seniors’ drug plan and special 
supports, Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I find myself . . . Down the road perhaps someday I 
will need medications and care as well. However the time is 
coming when we will all need benefits of drugs. 
 
And I am very pleased to have participated in this motion; 
however, in conclusion, I look forward to listening to more. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this case of . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Sorry. I recognize the member, the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Oh, I’m sorry; I failed to be recognized. Pardon 
me. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Go ahead. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thanks. Pardon me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this question of pharmacare is certainly one 
that is very close to my heart. Coming as I do from the 
profession of medicine, it is something that I saw frequently 
affecting the lives of my patients.  
 

I can recall a situation where a younger woman who was a 
patient of mine who did not have coverage for medication. And 
we were able to, through a fund that was available through the 
clinic, get her the medication she needed, and there were tears 
of joy. She was so excited at that very unlikely thing because 
she, and so many, have that experience of needing medications, 
knowing that that’s what’s been prescribed, knowing that that’s 
what will make a difference in their health, but not being able to 
afford to actually purchase those medications. And this 
certainly was not an isolated incident in my practice. It was part 
of our daily discussions, was how to get people the medications 
they couldn’t afford. Patients were having to choose between 
paying for the medications they needed and paying for their 
rent. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this certainly isn’t isolated to my practice. 
We hear this from colleagues across the country, colleagues 
who are regularly having to have that conversation with their 
patients where they say, you need these six medications, and the 
patients say, well we can only afford one or two. And they’re 
having to say which ones they would choose, even though all 
six are needed. And this is a common experience across the 
country. In fact a poll from a couple of years ago showed that 
one in five Canadians are having to make decisions like cutting 
pills in half or skipping doses or not filling prescriptions at all 
because they’re not able to afford the medications they need. 
 
So why is that? Why is that the case in Saskatchewan and in 
Canada? Why is that? Because Canada is the only OECD 
[Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development] 
country that has a universal, publicly funded health system that 
doesn’t include medication coverage. We cover over 90 per cent 
of medical costs, over 90 per cent of hospital costs, but less than 
40 per cent of medication costs. And that leaves many people 
without coverage. It also results in what we’ve seen, which is 
the fastest rising cost in our health care system is medications. 
It’s grown to $30 billion a year, over four times as much as it 
was 20 years ago. The result of that is that we are paying, in 
Canada we pay the highest prices in the world for generic 
drugs, the second-highest prices in the entire world for brand 
name drugs. We’re not getting these medications at a good 
price. 
 
And who’s paying? The patients are paying, or they’re not 
paying because they can’t even afford to. And we are paying 
when people show up with the impacts of not being able to take 
those medications. They’re showing up later with heart 
troubles, with strokes, things that could have been prevented. 
That’s why our costs in medications are going through the roof, 
that’s why our overall health costs continue to rise, and that’s 
why so many people are having to make that choice between 
paying for their rent and paying for the medications they need 
to stay healthy.  
 
It’s also why so many Canadians support the idea of 
pharmacare. Over 90 per cent of Canadians polled think that it’s 
a good idea for us to have universal pharmacare. They 
recognize the importance. It’s also why experts in the field 
support this idea. Two years ago there was a Canadian Medical 
Association general conference, and over 90 per cent of the 
physicians present voted in favour of a universal pharmacare 
program. It makes so much sense, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why 
we have so much support for it. The idea just makes that much 



April 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4075 

sense. 
 
A study from 2015 by Dr. Steve Morgan and some other folks, 
Danielle Martin and other experts in the field, show that $7 
billion would be saved to our national expenditures on drugs if 
we had a universal pharmacare plan. Seven billion dollars 
decreased costs with almost no cost to governments, and that 
was, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that was a very conservative estimate 
of what the savings would be. 
 
Where do those savings come from? They come from bulk 
buying. When you buy as a country, as a whole, you manage to 
get a better price. And we’ve seen that already at the provincial 
level where Quebec was recently able to negotiate a 40 per cent 
decrease in what they were paying for their medications. 
 
We see it at a national level. New Zealand, a country much 
smaller, much smaller population than ours, has been able to 
negotiate a much better deal for their medications. There’s a 
drug called atorvastatin or Lipitor. To buy that drug in Canada, 
we pay 10 times as much for the exact same pill in New 
Zealand. It doesn’t make a lot of sense. If we were bulk buying, 
if we had a national pharmacare program the way that they do, 
we’d be able to drive those prices down. 
 
The other way that this drives prices down is through an 
approach that we are referring more and more to as the 
Choosing Wisely approach, where we have about 30 per cent of 
our health care spending going to medications and other 
treatments, procedures and imaging that isn’t actually medically 
necessary. And when you do the Choosing Wisely approach, 
when you bring in a universal pharmacare program with an 
evidence-based formulary, you’re able to really concentrate on 
the medications that are the right ones to buy, get them at the 
best price, get people the best outcomes, and reduce those extra 
costs. 
 
And we’ve seen efforts from this government to try to reduce 
costs through the lean method. However, you know, what that 
really focused on was trying to do what we already do, faster, 
more efficiently. And there may be opportunities for savings 
there, but you actually need to step back further and ask, are we 
doing the right things? Are we doing the evidence-based, 
cost-effective choices? 
 
The third element, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is an element that 
wasn’t even calculated into that $7 billion in savings. When we 
look at that $7 billion, that’s just in getting better prices for the 
medications. What we need to also recognize is that the 
downstream costs . . . When you look at paying for people’s 
high blood pressure pills, when you pay for their diabetes 
medications, then you don’t have to end up paying for their 
dialysis or their stroke rehab unit. So we would be saving 
billions and billions of dollars more when it comes to our health 
care if we had universal pharmacare. 
 
So the other day here in question period I asked the Premier, I 
asked him whether he would be willing to join with us and 
support our call for national pharmacare, and at first it seemed 
like he was into the idea. At first he seemed like he was willing 
to get on board, but then as we discussed it further he seemed to 
back away from that. And that confusion on that side of House, 
you know, added to some confusion over here. We’re confused 

about what is not to like. Is it the savings for governments in the 
purchase of medications? Is it the savings in paying for health 
care costs as we prevent further illness? Or is it the improved 
health outcomes for individuals? Which of these does this 
government not see as a positive thing? Because, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s very clear: with pharmacare we would have universal 
coverage so that no patient would have to make the choice 
between paying for the medications they need, the 
evidence-based treatment they need, and having to pay for their 
rent or having to pay for food. 
 
Now we heard objections over there about, well maybe what we 
get from a universal national pharmacare program wouldn’t be 
as good as what we already have in Saskatchewan. But I guess 
the other question then would be, what part of “universal, 
publicly funded” does the government not understand? We need 
to make sure that if we’re going to have a pharmacare program, 
it is of the best quality and for that we need this government to 
actually step up because they have the opportunity to stand up 
and say to the federal government that yes, we want a universal 
program. We want it to be national. We want it to be first-dollar 
so that every person has access. And we want to use that 
program to drive down costs in drug costs, drive down costs in 
health care costs, and improve health outcomes, improve the 
lives of Canadians. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Unfortunately while this government does like to rail against 
the federal government, their advocacy at that level is 
tremendously ineffective. They continually are unsuccessful in 
getting what they want out of the federal government. 
 
Here’s an opportunity where we’ve heard signals from the 
federal government. We hear loud and clear from people around 
the country that they want this. Here is an opportunity for this 
government to step up, to join us, and say yes, we want a 
universal program. We want it as soon as possible, and we want 
it to be top quality. 
 
All the evidence is there. The public’s on board. Will this 
government join us and join me and this caucus in supporting 
this measure asking the federal government to implement a 
national pharmacare program? Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
happy today to stand up and reply to the motion from the 
member from Saskatoon Riversdale to call upon the federal 
government to fully fund a national pharmacare strategy. But, 
Mr. Speaker, when you skim the surface of this motion, it 
presents a lot of concern for me that we don’t have enough facts 
to even discuss it in a meaningful manner. 
 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, already has one of the most 
comprehensive drug plans in all of Canada. And so we can’t 
just assume that a national plan would be better than the 
Saskatchewan plan we have already, and it might be even 
worse. 
 
Across Canada, Mr. Speaker, the public cost share varies 



4076 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2018 

among the provinces, and in Saskatchewan the share is 48 per 
cent, which is the highest in Canada. New Brunswick, Mr. 
Speaker, is the lowest at 29 per cent. So there’s quite a little 
variance among the provinces. And I think we have a very good 
plan. Saskatchewan residents already have a great plan, and I 
think we need to be careful before we sign up to any national 
plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think one of the first questions that maybe we 
need to ask is, what is the goal of a national pharmacare plan? 
Is it to have a common formulary of drugs covered under the 
plan? Is it affordability? And who will be covered? Everyone? 
Certain groups? Certain income levels? And what drugs would 
be covered? The essential medications? The expensive 
medications? All medications? Mr. Speaker, I think those are all 
important questions that we need to ask. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan there are over 1,400 
drugs on the formulary, and that is a 36 per cent increase since 
2007 when the Saskatchewan Party formed government. And 
Saskatchewan has special programs to assist seniors, children, 
and residents with low incomes and others as well. 
 
And there is no solid information on the cost of implementing a 
national pharmacare plan here in Saskatchewan. So, Mr. 
Speaker, right off the start, there is no way we can support this 
plan without knowing the basics. Would this be a plan that 
would be fully funded by the federal government? And if not, 
by who? Mr. Speaker, what is the cost to Saskatchewan? A 
billion dollars? $5 billion? We know that the NDP have not 
costed projects in the past when they think that we should move 
ahead on a project. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the last leadership campaign for 
the NDP. They never costed any of their leadership promises, 
and when we did the work for them, they were completely 
surprised at the cost of $2.5 billion. $2.5 billion per year with 
no plans on how they would fund this campaign plan. Mr. 
Speaker, there is no information that would give us any 
indication of how this would impact Saskatchewan financially. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government would be open to hearing more 
about a federal pharmacare plan, and we would be glad to 
engage in discussions and fully collaborate with the federal 
government. But again I emphasize, we need to have a lot more 
information before we even consider it would be in the best 
interests of Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, affordable access to medications is an area of a 
great importance to our government, and Saskatchewan would 
be open to the idea of a national pharmacare plan. However, 
Mr. Speaker, implementing a federal pharmacare plan would be 
complex and something provinces and territories would be 
unlikely to consider in the absence of a partnership with the 
federal government and federal funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to keep in mind that when medicare 
started, the federal government committed to covering 50 per 
cent of the cost. Well today, Mr. Speaker, the Canada Health 
Transfer accounts for 20 per cent of the cost. So we need to ask 
the question: is this how the federal government will treat 
pharmacare? And if so, how much will it cost? Will this be yet 
another program forced upon the Saskatchewan people and with 

Saskatchewan taxpayer money? 
 
I would emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that discussions have been 
ongoing for decades. However the discussions have always 
stalled due to the lack of federal willingness to entertain 
funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not surprising of the members opposite to put 
forward a motion to spend money without any information as to 
the financial impact on our province. What is a bit different 
today is the narrative that, if they were in government, they 
would look after the needs of Saskatchewan people better than 
this government does. Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s remind them of 
the facts. 
 
The last time the NDP were in government, they closed 52 
hospitals, including one right here in Regina. And the NDP 
government had the worst doctor and nurse retention record in 
Canada. Between 2001 to 2006 the province lost 450 nurses and 
173 doctors. The NDP government eliminated 12 long-term 
care beds. And under the NDP, Saskatchewan had the longest 
wait times in Canada, with thousands waiting a year or longer 
for surgery. 
 
In stark contrast, since being elected in 2007, there are nearly 
750 more doctors and 3,400 more nurses of all designations. 
And we are also training more doctors and nurses in 
Saskatchewan. The number of physician training seats has been 
increased by 40 and the number of training seats for nurses has 
increased by 300 since 2007. Also under the Saskatchewan 
Party government, we’ll have built or are building 15 new 
long-term care homes. And in this budget, Mr. Speaker, there is 
an investment of 5.36 billion for the Ministry of Health, an 
increase of 2.9 per cent from 2017-2018. 
 
Mr. Speaker, targeted funding will provide Saskatchewan 
people with improved access to mental health, palliative care, 
and community-based primary health care services, and provide 
universal coverage of HIV medications. Federal funding, Mr. 
Speaker, of 19.02 million to support the provincial Connected 
Care strategy, this investment builds on existing provincial 
spending on team-based community health services and primary 
health care for patients who may be best served in a home or 
community setting. 
 
Additionally, federal and provincial funding of 11.4 million to 
improve community-based mental health services and supports 
for children, youth, and families; additional funding for key 
initiatives — 600,000 to provide universal drug coverage for 
HIV medications, $50,000 for AIDS Saskatoon, and an 
additional $50,000 for Saskatoon’s Westside Clinic to provide 
additional HIV supports. A $523,000 investment will create the 
new universal newborn hearing screening program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite would have you think that 
if we were to blindly support this motion that the federal 
government would fund a national pharmacare plan. In my 
comments earlier, I think I . . . What happened with medicare is 
a pretty clear example of what would happen if we just blindly 
went ahead and supported this motion. 
 
However, if you read the executive summary in the federal 
parliamentary report, the report states: “Given our federated 



April 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4077 

state, the committee believes that the program should be 
cost-shared between federal, provincial and territorial 
governments.” Again I ask, what share is that going to be? How 
much is the cost going to be for the province of Saskatchewan? 
How is it going to impact medically for the people of 
Saskatchewan? Are we actually going to end up worse? “. . . 
private drug plans and Canadians at large to identify the best 
possible approaches towards financing this new program.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, one part I can agree with on the previous 
statement is that we need to undertake consultations as our first 
step, and that, Mr. Speaker, is how this motion should have 
read. And for that reason and many others, I can’t find any 
reason to support this motion without having a lot more 
information. And so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to hear more 
information from the opposite side, but with this amount of 
information I cannot support their motion. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. It’s disappointing 
to enter into such an important debate, see members on the 
other side not take a stand for their constituents, Mr. Speaker. 
What we’re talking about here is something that allows us to get 
value for the people of our province and those that we serve. 
And the reality is that far too many of our constituents, each and 
every one of us, are having to make the choice between things 
like rent or food in the fridge or in the cupboard, or the 
medications that they so desperately need, Mr. Speaker. This 
hits those that are in a more vulnerable position, even harder, so 
many seniors that are put in this position, and it weakens the 
effectiveness of our health care system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course Canada is the only country with a universal health 
care system that doesn’t offer prescription drug coverage. You 
know, and this oversight certainly results in unnecessary illness, 
worsening medical and health conditions, and it costs us 
billions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. And I know that sometimes we 
can’t get the other side to do things for the right reasons when it 
comes to improving people’s lives or improving well-being 
across our province. But I’d hope their attention would be 
grabbed by the billions of dollars that we could save Canadians. 
The dollars that we could save Saskatchewan people, 
Saskatchewan workers, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan seniors. 
 
It’s been clear that in other countries that have a universal 
health care system that when they have a universal prescription 
or drug coverage system, that they have economic clout in that 
system and they’re able to drive much greater value in the 
purchase of the medications that people need to live and stay 
healthy to work, Mr. Speaker. You know, I’ve looked at the 
case of, you know, a country like New Zealand, as an example, 
that buys medications that we’re paying . . . on pennies on the 
dollar, Mr. Speaker, forcing Saskatchewan people and 
Canadians to pay 10 and 20 times more for common 
medications that are essential to their well-being, essential to 
their quality of life, essential to their relationships and their 
happiness, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, we have a discussion in this Assembly that we’ve 
been elevating, Mr. Speaker, calling for action to address 

mental health and addiction services in our province — a 
system that’s clearly broken and inadequate in serving people 
all through our province. Now an important part of that is the 
prescription side as well, Mr. Speaker. If those suffering and 
dealing with illness don’t have the medications, aren’t able to 
afford the medications that they need, then our system fails and 
there’s a breakdown, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:45] 
 
We already fund a universal health care system. We already 
fund that visit to the doctor. We already visit that entry into the 
health care system, which is essential and something that we 
should be so proud of as Saskatchewan people, so proud of as 
Canadians. I know it’s something I’m incredibly proud of as a 
CCF-NDPer [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New 
Democratic Party], Mr. Speaker. But we should be providing 
leadership to make sure that we ensure the effectiveness, the 
highest level of efficiency and effectiveness of that system by 
making sure that when somebody goes into the doctor — be it a 
young parent with their sick child; be it a worker that’s dealing 
with mental health challenges; be it a senior, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
dealing with diabetes — we should make sure that that person, 
that patient is able to access the prescriptions that they need. 
 
We pay for the cost of going to see that doctor and of course we 
pay for the costs of their health worsening, of not responding to 
that illness. We pay for it when they show up in the emergency 
room. We pay for it when they show up at the highest level of 
cost for the system in through the hospital services, Mr. 
Speaker. What we should be doing is making sure we make our 
system as effective as possible by ensuring prescriptions for all. 
 
You know, the evidence is strong on this front. Canadians and 
Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan workers, Saskatchewan 
seniors, people living with disabilities, are getting gouged 
because of the absence of a national pharmacare system within 
our country. Our best way to respond, from my perspective, is 
as a nation. It gives us the greatest economic clout to go and 
negotiate the best prices on medications that Canadians need. I 
know that there’s been assessments by independent offices and 
accountants and economists that talk about the billions of 
dollars that would be saved. I know that a 2015 study shows 
that universal drug coverage would save Canadians over $7 
billion and with little or no increase to government spending. 
 
I want to touch on another factor. We have so many people that 
are working two and three jobs just to make ends meet, working 
in some of the most precarious environments and precarious 
roles throughout our province, not making much money at all, 
doing all they can to keep their head above water, doing all they 
can to put food in their fridge, doing all they can to pay rent or 
make mortgage payments, Mr. Speaker. Many of those workers 
don’t have drug coverage. Many of those workers, when they 
need medications to ensure their health, they’re not able to 
access those medications. And whether it be for a physical 
ailment, Mr. Speaker, or a chronic disease, or whether it’s for 
mental health, our failure to properly treat those individuals 
certainly costs them, but it costs all of us. We’re pulling 
workers, Mr. Speaker, away from our economy, away from 
their jobs. It translates into significant economic challenges at 
the household level. 
 



4078 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2018 

We see right now within our province that we’re leading the 
nation, sadly, when it comes to defaults on mortgage payments. 
That’s a, you know, sort of a canary in the coal mine when it 
comes to an assessment of the economy and how it’s working 
for Saskatchewan people. And when workers are pulled out of 
employment because they’re injured and ill, it costs all of us. 
And they end up in our health care system at a much higher 
cost, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this was always the vision for our universal health care 
system, to step up and to insure prescriptions or medications for 
Canadians, for Saskatchewan people. It’s on us to deliver that 
phase of medicare, and in doing so we provide greater 
well-being to all Saskatchewan people. We alleviate incredible 
financial pressure on so many where we bring about the ability 
for so many to heal and to get well, Mr. Speaker. And we save 
money for taxpayers. We save money for Canadians. We save 
money for workers while strengthening our economy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I’m strongly in support of standing together here today in 
supporting the motion. I’m disappointed that members opposite 
would take such weak, unprincipled, weak positions, weak 
positions, Mr. Speaker, in standing up for their constituents. 
And certainly we should be doing all we can to urge the federal 
government to step up and to fund, with the involvement of 
provinces, a national pharmacare system across our country. 
 
We see other provinces stepping up and looking at doing this 
themself, and that’s an option. But of course economics dictate 
that our ability to build the most effective, affordable system 
with the greatest level of economic clout and impact is by doing 
that as a nation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I implore members opposite who took to their feet, Mr. 
Speaker, here today to not . . . that didn’t stand up for their 
constituents and for our province or for our health system, to 
reconsider their positions. And I’m proud to stand with this 
official opposition and the Saskatchewan NDP in pushing for a 
national pharmacare system. 
 
And I just, you know, I just am motivated by the story after 
story of worker after worker, constituent after constituent, 
senior after senior who’s been forced to be into that position of 
making the choice between the food that they need or the 
prescriptions that they also need, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to enter into this debate today and I look forward to the 
questions to come. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to enter 
into the debate today. I find it interesting that the very last thing 
that the member opposite had accused us of in his statements 
was that we weren’t standing up for our constituents when it 
comes to health care. Well I would beg to differ with that 
assessment, Mr. Speaker. One of my colleagues outlined the 
horrible record in health care under the NDP before 2007. And I 
think we’ve made some marked improvements, whether you 
look at recruiting nurses to our province, and the amount of 
nurses that we have here — more than in 2007; increasing 
training seats for doctors; building hospitals instead of closing 

them. 
 
I think we’ve probably, I dare say, done more for our 
constituents when it comes to health care than the NDP did their 
last go at government. And I would suggest the best thing that 
we can do for our constituents is to continue to earn their trust 
so that this party stays in government. Because heaven forbid 
the NDP get back in because we know exactly what they would 
do if they had the opportunity in government again, Mr. 
Speaker. So I take great exception to that. 
 
I do find it interesting that the Leader of the Opposition was 
participating in private members’ day during the 75-minute 
debate. I checked with some of my colleagues who have been 
here a little bit longer than I have and none of us ever remember 
that happening. So obviously they’re seized with this issue, and 
fair point. I talked to the Health minister yesterday and he’s 
committed to continuing to engage with the federal government 
and have discussions on this. But as my colleagues who have 
already spoken have stated, the motion before us today is asking 
us to support something that is an unknown. So we’ll continue 
to have those discussions with the federal government going 
forward, but obviously we’ve got some concerns. 
 
We’ve seen over the last several years . . . Health funding used 
to be funded by about 50 per cent by the federal government; 
it’s down to 20. So obviously there’s going to be some concern 
amongst provinces, what their funding levels will continue to 
be. You know, they could promise something at the very 
beginning and then reduce that funding going forward or drop it 
altogether. I sat on treasury board for many years and I’ve heard 
more than one ministry come forward saying that the federal 
government is cutting funding to a specific program and we 
have to discuss whether or not we’re going to backfill those. So 
federal government does not have a great track record in this 
respect so that would obviously be a big concern to us. 
 
And there was a list of other questions that my colleagues have 
already talked about, so I’m not going to go back and rehash 
those. But, Mr. Speaker, as I said, considering that the NDP 
leader was participating in this debate today, they are obviously 
seized with this as very important. I would suggest, Mr. 
Speaker, there are other issues facing our province today that 
are equally, and in most cases probably very timely for us to be 
discussing, and perhaps we should be discussing those. 
 
I would encourage the NDP to perhaps bring forward a motion 
— I don’t know, Mr. Speaker — defending our province 
against a federally imposed carbon tax. That might be 
something that we could get behind if they wanted to do that. 
But, Mr. Speaker, we know that the NDP are firmly in support 
of a carbon tax, except perhaps the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview who denied that in committee on Monday. So good on 
her for breaking ranks with her party on this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they want us to wave the white flag and sign on to 
the federal carbon tax so that we get $62 million in 
infrastructure funding at a cost of $4 billion to our economy. 
Only the NDP would see that as good math, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
NDP math. It doesn’t make any sense that we would undertake 
an activity, a tax on our province that would cripple our 
industry so we get $62 million in infrastructure funding. It 
doesn’t make any sense. 



April 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4079 

They ridicule our attempts to defend Saskatchewan’s interests. 
We made the announcement yesterday that we’re taking this to 
the Court of Appeal in Saskatchewan to see if they even have 
the constitutional ability to impose this tax on Saskatchewan. 
We believe that they do not. And we would hope, Mr. Speaker, 
that the NDP would be seized with this issue, that they would 
stand with us instead of, Mr. Speaker, abdicating their 
responsibility. They talk about standing up for constituents. 
How about they stand up for their constituents on this? 
 
The Leader of the Opposition said, and I quote, when it comes 
to this court challenge, “This is going to be an effort that is 
expensive and, worse, risky.” Well, Mr. Speaker, I would 
submit that what’s going be expensive to our province is an 
NDP carbon tax that they want to impose on us, and that they’re 
fully supportive of Trudeau implementing a carbon tax on us. 
That’s what’s going to be expensive for our province. 
 
What’s going to be risky for our province is not a 
government-sponsored court challenge on the constitutionality 
of a Trudeau carbon tax. What’s risky is a carbon tax being 
imposed upon us, Mr. Speaker. It’s a $4 billion hit to our 
province. It hits our resource industry, costing jobs, the very 
good-paying, mortgage-paying jobs that the NDP are always 
talking about. It is those very people that the NDP say they 
want to defend who will be affected by this. So why are they 
not standing up with us on this point, Mr. Speaker . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . They will. We’ll just leave them 
behind. And if they want to stand up and they don’t want to get 
behind our court challenge, that’s fine. 
 
But how about another topic? How about Kinder Morgan and 
pipelines? They say in this Chamber that they want to support 
pipelines. They’re even cheering from their seats on this 
position, Mr. Speaker. Well then, riddle me this: when their 
federal leader comes out and says that there should be no 
pipelines anywhere because it increases our capacity to produce 
oil, where are they then? Have they come out publicly against 
their federal leader to stand up for Saskatchewan? It’s been 
crickets. There hasn’t been one peep from them publicly asking 
their federal leader to stand down from his damaging position 
that would ruin our economy. 
 
Their leader said — well now they’re beaking from their seats 
because they don’t want to talk about this — their federal leader 
said, and I quote, “. . . we must oppose the proposed expansion 
of the Kinder Morgan pipeline and the building of the Energy 
East pipeline” because it significantly increases oil production 
and international oil exports. Well heaven forbid we export our 
oil outside of our country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Do you think they could be seized with this issue and stand up 
with us and against their federal leader? No, not happening. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s easier for them to say things in here. We know that 
there’s not a lot of people watching the legislative channel or 
reading Hansard. I think we do it. I know the Environment 
minister and I do that on a regular basis because once a 
researcher, always a researcher. But apparently the NDP 
federally think they’re all on the same big team. 
 
Peter Julian, during the last leadership debate said, and I quote, 
“We have a situation . . .” And this is on Kinder Morgan: “We 
have a situation where British Columbians have said no. We 

have the federal caucus who has said no. There is a very clear 
consensus amongst New Democrats.” 
 
Well apparently this little group of NDPers are not in consensus 
with their federal group, so stand up for Saskatchewan and go 
tell them that. Have we heard anything? No. Mr. Speaker, they 
don’t even have to talk to their federal leader. All they have to 
do is go talk to their provincial buddy over in BC [British 
Columbia], their brothers and sisters in British Columbia and 
go, hey, John Horgan, you know what you’re doing to 
Saskatchewan? You’re hurting our economy. You’re hurting 
our industries. You’re hurting our export capabilities. Have they 
had that conversation? No. 
 
But you know what they did have, Mr. Speaker, was a big fat 
contribution from John Horgan to their leadership campaign. 
Well if they’re going to stand up for Saskatchewan and say that 
our interests are that important, why don’t they just send the 
money back and say, thanks but no thanks? They want to take 
big money out of politics. They don’t want out-of-province 
contributions coming in here. They don’t want contributions 
from people that we don’t know coming into Saskatchewan. 
Why? Because it causes undue influence on the political 
process. Well if that’s their position — no out-of-province 
money, causes undue influence — then give back John 
Horgan’s money. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if they want to stand up for us, they could do a 
whole bunch of things. They could have these conversations 
here today. They could stand up with us to defend 
Saskatchewan against the carbon tax. They could stand against 
their federal leader on his plan to destroy pipelines in this 
country. And they could stand up against John Horgan and the 
BC NDP who are trying to destroy Western Canadian economy 
by wanting to shut down oil industry in Alberta and 
Saskatchewan. If they want to stand up for Saskatchewan, do 
that instead of waving the white flag. 
 
[12:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 
Before we move into questions, I would simply offer this 
comment to members in future 75-minute debates: that debates 
on a motion, the comments should be relevant to the motion. I 
would simply caution members that they may want to talk to the 
motion. 
 
With that, we go for questions. I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members 
opposite’s solution to most things is to start another Crown 
corporation. Well we know how that’s worked in the past. We 
have SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company], Big Sky. I don’t think those ring a bell to the 
members opposite. 
 
Now the new leader wishes to open up an additional Crown 
corporation, SaskPharm, within his additional $2.5 billion 
spending spree every year. Potatoes, pigs, and now 
prescriptions. My question is to the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin: in your plan to afford all this, which taxes will you 
raise? 



4080 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2018 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, the confusion that reigns on that 
side around Crown corporations continues to be evident. Crown 
corporations are not a source of increased tax dollars that we 
have to spend. They’re a big source of revenue. And what this 
government likes to talk about when they talk about Crown 
corporations, what they like to talk about is how to shut them 
down. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 2017 when the 
parliamentary budget officer estimated how much would be 
saved on prescriptions if Canadians were covered by these 
cheaper provincial drug plans, he concluded it would be $4.2 
billion annually. What part does . . . To the member from 
Westview: does he support saving taxpayers’ dollars and 
spending smarter when it comes to health care? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You 
know, Mr. Speaker, we will engage in discussions and fully 
collaborate with the federal government for all the work that’s 
been undertaken already to create a national pharmacare plan. 
However, we cannot support this motion until we have a clear 
indication that the federal government will not only be a full 
funding partner but will also enact a plan that in no way 
diminishes Saskatchewan’s drug plan, currently one of the most 
comprehensive drug plans in Canada. I mean in Saskatchewan 
48 per cent of the cost is covered by this province, the highest 
in Canada. New Brunswick is 29 per cent, so a significant 
difference. So why would we want to go away from a good plan 
we already have? 1,400 drugs are in our drug formulary, which 
is a 36 per cent increase since 2007. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would again 
like to commend this government for the record investment . . . 
[inaudible] . . . In this year’s budget, it was announced that 
targeting funding would be provided to Saskatchewan people, 
including universal coverage for HIV medications. It is a 
shame, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite all voted 
against this investment. They claim to stand alongside the 
vulnerable people of Saskatchewan but do not support 
investment and improvement to our health care system. My 
question is for the member from Saskatchewan Riversdale: why 
did you vote against universal HIV coverage? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, that is one of the most 
laughable questions I’ve ever heard in this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. We voted against a budget that hurts people here in 
Saskatchewan, that didn’t provide a vision for the people of 
Saskatchewan. Totally supportive of that particular measure, 

Mr. Speaker, but one item or a couple of items in an otherwise 
incredibly disappointing budget can’t be supported. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Speaker, we have the 
opportunity to represent people in this Assembly, and this was a 
chance to do the right thing for our constituents, the people of 
our province, save money and save lives. My question to the 
member for Saskatoon Westview: of course he has untold 
millions of dollars for the GTH scandal, it seems limited 
interest in a GTH inquiry, but no interest in standing up for a 
national pharmacare plan that would save money and lives. 
How does he explain those priorities to his constituents? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, we understand that the costs of prescription 
medications can be a financial burden for individuals and 
families. And we take that seriously on this side of the House. 
That’s why 1,400 drugs on the drug plan covered and we cover 
48 per cent here in Saskatchewan, the best in Canada. You 
know, we have to remember that there’s a lot of good things 
that we already have in this plan, so why would we change it to 
a plan we know nothing about? There’s hardly any information 
for us to go on. And so Saskatchewan’s drug plan offers 
comprehensive coverage to residents, one of the best in the 
country, and benefits are targeted to people who need them the 
most and to drug therapies that are the most effective. And the 
public share, as I talked about already, is 48 per cent here in 
Saskatchewan. That’s the highest in Canada. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 
government will fully co-operate with the federal government 
on a pharmaceutical plan, although our support would hinge on 
its ability to better support the people of this province. The 
member opposite is willing to support the plan that the federal 
government has not yet established, with no idea what it may 
entail, how it would impact our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. How can you support a plan that you have never 
seen, one that could be less comprehensive than what we 
already have? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With all due 
respect, I’m not sure what part of “universal” those members 
opposite don’t understand. I’d encourage them all to reread the 
motion because none of their questions seem to show that they 
actually understand the motion. I’d like to read the motion into 
the record: 
 

That this Assembly calls upon the federal government to 



April 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4081 

move beyond words and fully fund a national pharmacare 
strategy [fully fund, Mr. Speaker, a national pharmacare 
strategy] so that all Canadians will be able to afford their 
prescription drugs. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I have to say that it’s disappointing 
to see members mock someone’s voice, especially somebody 
who’s been dealing with an illness. That’s really unacceptable. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the question that I would like to ask is what 
the member just referenced. We heard from a number of these 
members that they’re worried that a comprehensive, universal 
pharmacare system would somehow be less than the coverage 
we’re currently getting. Well would these members step up and 
join us in asking for what we’re asking for, for what the motion 
says, a fully funded universal pharmacare system? I ask that 
question to the member for Saskatoon Martensville . . . or 
Martensville. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Martensville-Warman. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Not Saskatoon Martensville, but maybe the 
constituency boundaries will change yet again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said at the very beginning of my remarks, I 
had spoken with the Health minister and the Minister for Rural 
and Remote Health, and they will continue to be engaged with 
the federal government on this discussion, Mr. Speaker, and 
going forward, to make sure that if something is put in place 
that there’s support across the country, that all provinces are 
participating, that funding is fully funded by the federal 
government, Mr. Speaker. We don’t have any of the answers to 
those questions right now. 
 
And in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, the drug plans that we have 
in place and the drug coverage in Saskatchewan is very good. 
They are wide-ranging to various groups of people, Mr. 
Speaker. And I would point out that of the 1,400 drugs listed on 
Saskatchewan’s formulary, there are 36 per cent more today 
than there were in 2007. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members 
opposite have been quick to side with the federal government 
over the people of Saskatchewan on a number of issues, the 
carbon tax being the most significant. This province’s drug plan 
is already one of the best in Canada, with public share of total 
prescription drug spending being 48 per cent. My question is to 
the member from Regina Rosemont: if a national pharmacare 
program is less comprehensive than our current program, will 
members opposite still support it? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. The member 
maybe read the question without being engaged in listening to 
the conversation or reading the motion, but our push is for a 
universal, comprehensive, national pharmacare plan, Mr. 
Speaker, fully funded. And of course, in doing so we save 
billions of dollars for Canadians who are being gouged on 
medications. In doing so we make sure that Canadians and 
Saskatchewan people get the medications that they so deserve. 
We save dollars and we save lives. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 2007 . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 
expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 2 — Opposition’s Fiscal Plan 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Mr. Nerlien.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 
Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to join into 
the debate on the motion proposed by our member from 
Kelvington-Wadena, in the motion that states: 
 

That this Assembly rejects the NDP’s plan to increase 
spending by over $2.5 billion, as it would leave 
Saskatchewan with an extreme deficit and increase the debt 
for future generations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think today I would like to begin with just a few 
comments about some of the items outlined in the recent 
campaign platform outlined by the now Leader of the NDP 
Party opposite. And I had the very great honour I think, Mr. 
Speaker, of being the minister responsible for Advanced 
Education for a brief time, something which I enjoyed greatly. 
And I would just like to look at a couple of the issues from this 
campaign platform. 
 
One of the first things that is outlined there that caught my 
attention, Mr. Speaker, was reverse the cuts made to our 
post-secondary partners. Well, Mr. Speaker, firstly, I would just 
like to say how much we’ve appreciated the efforts of our 
post-secondary partners in holding the line on expenses and 
making the necessary efficiency changes that were needed to 
ensure that our students, our young people in this province, 
continue to get a great education at an affordable rate, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And you’re going to hear me say many times here this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, that there’s been really no concrete 
numbers proposed in this plan, in this campaign platform. No 



4082 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2018 

way to pay for it. No itemized costs, Mr. Speaker. So we’re 
going to have to make some assumptions. But I think in this 
situation we could assume that restoring funding would be 
about $44 million. But, Mr. Speaker, let’s do a little comparison 
here, and some days, Mr. Speaker, I think hypocrisy seems to 
abound in this hallowed Chamber, but I’ll just talk a little bit 
about tuition rates here. 
 
Since ’14-15 budget, under this government, Mr. Speaker, 
tuition rates have risen by an average of 4 per cent at our 
universities, and only once during that period of time was it 
higher than 4 per cent, at 4.3 per cent. Now, Mr. Speaker, let’s 
compare that to what happened under the dark days of that NDP 
government. And he talks about stable tuition rates in this 
platform. Mr. Speaker, from ’90-91 to ’06-07, our 
undergraduate tuition rates at both of our universities — the 
University of Saskatchewan and the University of Regina — 
went up by a staggering 227 per cent, Mr. Speaker. At Sask 
Poly, which was then SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology] of course at that time, it was 
even worse. It went up by . . . Tuition rates rose in that period of 
time by 320 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this platform, this plan also wants to see more 
government funding for our universities. Well fair enough, Mr. 
Speaker. But again we have to figure out where that’s going to 
come from. 
 
[12:15] 
 
But here is what’s happening today. Here’s the facts, Mr. 
Speaker. Our Government of Saskatchewan funding for the 
University of Saskatchewan presently accounts for about 63 per 
cent of their total revenue. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the fifth 
highest in the country of comparable universities, 15 
comparable universities of the medical doctoral universities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, three of those four universities that receive 
higher funding than ours does are in the province of Quebec. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we know where the province of Quebec gets 
its funding — from equalization payments. Their equalization 
payments last year, Mr. Speaker, almost totalled as much as 
what our total budget here is in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Same story, Mr. Speaker, at the University of Regina. Fifty-five 
per cent of their revenue comes from the Government of 
Saskatchewan and that’s the fourth highest of the 14 
comparable universities. That’s the comprehensive universities, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This campaign plan, this plan also proposes that we would 
throw out the grad retention program. Mr. Speaker, I submit to 
you that our grad retention program was one of the most 
substantial and the most successful in anywhere in the country. 
And if he wants to take this plan, this idea to 70,000 grads who 
have taken advantage of this program and have accessed $406 
million in tax savings in order to stay here in the province and 
work in the province, I think they would have some strong 
messages for him with that plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he suggests doing this, throwing out our grad 
retention program, in order to lower our tuition rates to the 
lowest in Western Canada. Well, Mr. Speaker, if we use the 

figures from Statistics Canada, for example, Manitoba has the 
lowest tuition rates in Western Canada. So let’s use Manitoba’s 
rates. And if we did that, Mr. Speaker, it would cost the 
province of Saskatchewan another $127 million. So even if we 
subtracted the $90 million that he scraps the grad retention 
program, that still leaves $36.7 million for the taxpayers of this 
province to pick up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this platform, this plan talks about a stable cash 
flow for our College of Medicine, Mr. Speaker. And our 
College of Medicine certainly is perhaps the flagship of our 
University of Saskatchewan. It’s so vitally important to 
continue to train doctors who will provide medical service, 
medical attention for the residents of our province, and certainly 
we appreciate the value. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, here’s what we’ve been doing for our College 
of Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan. And yes, they 
have had accreditation problems in the past, and they have now 
resolved them. But at their most recent accreditation review, 
which was late last fall, they came to us in mid-year, in 
summertime, and requested $20 million to help meet those 
accreditation review. We reviewed their request, Mr. Speaker, 
and we were happy to be able to provide $20 million in funding. 
That was on top of the 67 million that was already in the ’17-18 
budget, Mr. Speaker, and again this year in our ’18-19 budget 
we have allotted $89 million for the College of Medicine. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s stable funding. That is stable funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this plan, this platform also goes on to make many 
suggestions for our farmers and our agriculture industry in this 
province, things like encourage fuel-efficient machinery, 
fuel-efficient purchases of tractors and combines. Well I happen 
to know a lot of farmers in this province, Mr. Speaker, and I 
don’t think there’s a one of them that would go out and buy a 
tractor that would use more fuel than what’s necessary. 
 
I don’t think we should be trying to tell our farmers how to 
make their choices, how to decide what crops to choose. The 
farmers, I think, are the best ones to make those decisions. 
They’re going to make the management decisions that are best 
for their business, and they know what’s best. They are in fact 
the best stewards of the land in this province and they will 
continue to be the best stewards because they have a vested 
interest in that land, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’ll make the crop choices that not only increase their 
bottom line and ensure their sustainability, but in fact the 
choices that they’re making with some things like they’ve done 
in recent years, like zero till, like moving to pulse crops, has 
actually resulted in a huge CO2 sink in our province, Mr. 
Speaker, to the tune of about 12 million tonnes. 
 
Something that I might add, that our federal counterparts, Prime 
Minister Trudeau and Minister McKenna give us no credit for, 
Mr. Speaker — we’re getting no credit for the carbon sinks that 
are being allocated in our farm industries. As well, they don’t 
even want to give us credit for what’s being done at Boundary 
dam 3, similar to what our NDP across the way talks about, Mr. 
Speaker, sequestering carbon each and every day that it’s 
running. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, here’s one that really sticks out in my mind, 



April 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4083 

and I’m not sure just where this came from, but it could cost as 
much as $18.1 million. And that was a proposal in this plan to 
pay farmers to quit using chemicals, to quit using fertilizers, to 
quit using sprays and to go organic. Well, Mr. Speaker, again I 
think farmers can best make these choices. 
 
But let’s take a look at some facts, Mr. Speaker. In 
Saskatchewan there’s presently approximately 850 certified 
organic producers, and that accounts for about 2.5 per cent of 
all farms in this province. So again we have to make an 
assumption. We don’t know what this plan, what this platform 
was proposing, but let’s say the plan was to double the number 
of organic farms in this province. So that would be another 900 
farms. And again, if we have to use some figures that are 
available to us today, if we use the figures from Quebec, from 
their conversion to organic program which provided $20,000 
per farm, if you take that $20,000 per farm for the 900 farmers, 
that’s another $18 million that the taxpayers of this province are 
going to have to come up with. 
 
Another plank in this very shaky platform and in this plan 
suggests that we should provide support for small farms and 
young farmers. So again, Mr. Speaker, this is full of 
assumptions, but let’s take a look at 2016 stats for a moment. At 
that time there were approximately 4,400 farmers in this 
province under the age of 35. So if we were to assume that . . . I 
don’t know for sure, but is he saying we’re going to give them 
each $10,000 to keep operating? I don’t know. And if we had a 
50 per cent uptake on that, that’s going to cost us $22 million, 
Mr. Speaker, to the taxpayers of this province. And as 
mentioned earlier, I think leave the farming decision up to the 
farmers. They’re the stewards of the land. They’re going to 
make the decisions that are best for their farming operations and 
indeed, best for this province and best for the environment. 
 
This plan also goes on to say that they want to see agriculture 
innovation commitments. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we can 
already tick that box. In our last budget we provided $25.78 
million for just that, Mr. Speaker. And this year we’ve 
announced a new ag tax incentive for value-added agriculture 
production. That’s our commitment for our ag community, our 
agriculture producers in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now I would just like to continue with a few comments 
about the platform regarding education, Mr. Speaker. This plan 
suggests that we should be doing more. How much more? We 
don’t really know. It didn’t say in that plan. But let’s make an 
assumption again here. In ’17-18 we invested seventy-nine and 
a quarter million dollars in early years funding. So if he’s 
suggesting a 10 per cent increase in that funding, there’s 
another $7.9 million. 
 
As well, this platform outlines developing affordable early 
childhood education programming. What does that mean? Well 
let’s use the Quebec model again. At $7 a day of cost, amounts 
to $9,000 per child in that province. Here in Saskatchewan we 
have 15,200 licensed daycare spaces, government-funded, at 
approximately $3,700 per space for a total of $56 million. If we 
were to move to even a $15-a-day cap, that would cost us 
another $40 million that would be paid for by the taxpayers in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this platform suggests that we roll out a nutritious 

lunch program for our students in this province. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I guess I would have to inform them that this program 
has been in effect in the province for 28 years. This year alone, 
Mr. Speaker, already we have provided $2.3 million and have 
provided 8 million meals already this year for our students. So 
what’s the plan here? Expand it by 20 per cent? Expand it by 10 
per cent? What is he proposing? Even if it went at 10 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s another $230,000. 
 
As well, he talks about . . . This plan talks about investing in 
libraries. ’16-17 funding, we provided $12.768 million, so if we 
assume a 10 per cent increase again, another $1 million. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, this plan expresses concern for our 
environment, which this side of the government is very 
concerned with as well, and should we all be. And it suggests 
spending dollars to promote resilient farming methods. Well I 
talked about that a little earlier, Mr. Speaker. We have 40 per 
cent of the arable land in this nation, Mr. Speaker. Our zero-till 
techniques, which have evolved over the last, let’s say 10, 15 
years, has resulted in about 12 million tonnes a year of carbon 
sinks into our soil. Mr. Speaker, another 21 million acres of 
grasslands, wetlands, forests, also account for sinks. Pulse 
growing in this province accounts for another 2 million tonnes, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also provide in ’17-18 that $25.78 million I talked about for 
ag research programming. Farmers best know what they can do 
with their land. They’re the long-term tenants of that land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I can just take a bit of an aside here. In my 
previous career as a realtor, I often had investors come to me 
and want to invest money and ask where I thought would be a 
good spot to put it. Would it be in a strip mall or in an 
apartment building or a fourplex? My advice to them was, very 
often, use the money to buy a quarter section of land, buy a half 
section of land. Rent it back to a farmer. You have one tenant to 
work with. The tenant pays cash or pays a crop share. He has a 
vested interest in looking after that land because he’s going to 
use the land next year and continue to make money. And I think 
that holds true for a lot of things in the ag industry. Farmers are 
the best stewards and they have the best knowledge of what’s 
. . . [inaudible]. 
 
This plan outlined in this platform also advocates establishing a 
new Saskatchewan transportation company. Well we better look 
at some facts here, Mr. Speaker, because there wasn’t any in 
this proposal. Since 1980, Mr. Speaker, on our old STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company], ridership declined by 
77 per cent. It declined by 35 per cent since ’12. Last year of its 
operation, ridership dropped by 9 per cent, another 18,000 rides. 
Since ’07 the subsidy per ride at that bus company rose from 
$25 to $94. And in fact, 1978 was the last year that STC 
returned any profit back to the taxpayer of this province. 
 
This plan, this campaign plan, they seem to feel that $10 million 
would restart STC. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m guessing that they 
haven’t bought many buses lately and they haven’t built many 
service garages and they haven’t built many customer service 
stations. So I think that’s not even realistic. I think if we took a 
more realistic . . . It’s going to cost us at least $50 million to 
reinstate STC. Plus if we look at 85 million that it may cost us 
over the next five years to run, that’s a $125 million difference, 



4084 Saskatchewan Hansard April 26, 2018 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if you look at that and break that down at an annual cost of 
$17 million to run that bus company again, and that’s, Mr. 
Speaker, take note, that’s only running it for half of the 
province. It was only servicing half of this province at that time 
to begin with. So I’m not sure. Are they going to make the 
decision on which town, which community would get a bus? Or 
would they provide it for the whole province? And that would 
drive up the 17 million cost. But even if you look at the $17 
million that the STC was losing — write that down — that’s 
about $46,000 per day. That $46,000 will pay for a lot of 
teachers, a lot of doctors, a lot of nurses in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the platform also suggested changes to municipal 
revenue sharing. And again as I said earlier, hypocrisy abounds 
here, Mr. Speaker. And I would like to say prior to our party 
having the honour of forming government, there was no 
predictable funding for municipal revenue sharing. 
 
[12:30] 
 
We heard from our municipal partners. They asked, and we 
responded. They wanted stable funding. In ’07-08, revenue 
sharing amounted to $127 million for all of our municipal 
partners. This year it’s up by a whopping 89 per cent, to $241.1 
million in revenue sharing. That’s what we’ve done for the 
municipalities in our province . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
That’s right. He suggests that we should use one point of all 
PST. That would amount to a cost of another $80 million to our 
taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. Where is that money coming from? 
Nothing outlined here. 
 
Again we’ve heard quite a bit of conversation today in our 
75-minute debate about this plan’s proposal for pharmacare. 
But was that costed out? Have we seen any numbers? I haven’t 
seen any numbers. Presently in Saskatchewan, the total cost of 
drugs is approximately $600 million. The drug plan covered 
about $330 million of that amount. So if we were to pay all 100 
per cent, that would amount to another $270 million. Again, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s got to be picked up by the taxpayers. 
 
He wants coverage, this plan wants coverage for all HIV meds. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, again we can check that box. One hundred 
per cent cost equalling some $700,000 covered in our health 
budget this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think there are some glaring omissions in this 
plan, and I’d just like to mention a couple of them here. First of 
all, I saw nothing in this plan about capital investments. The 
plan outlines approximately $2.5 billion in expenses, but then if 
you add to it some of the things that we proposed in our most 
recent budget — things like $1.5 billion for infrastructure in our 
Crown corporations, another $1.2 billion for the Sask Builds 
capital plan — not here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Health infrastructure spending, one item alone, $34 million for 
the Sask Hospital, North Battleford — something that is very, 
very important to me and to all residents of this province, but 
certainly residents of the Battlefords. 
 
$214 million for highway upgrades and safety projects. Several 
passing lanes, great safety factor, and that including Highway 

No. 4 between North Battleford and Cochin, something that 
we’ve been asking for for many, many years. And it’s going to 
be a great addition to a very, very busy highway. 
 
$18 million in transfers to municipal infrastructure for 
municipal roads, urban connector program, community airports. 
And just on the side here, Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to mention 
last year we received $275,000 for repaving of our North 
Battleford Cameron McIntosh Airport. That airport’s very 
important to the whole part of Northwest. It not only serves The 
Battlefords but it serves all the Northwest — oil exploration up 
in that area, mining exploration, farm population. Very 
important. 
 
Second admission, Mr. Speaker, no indication here where the 
dollars are going to come from. They always ask, many, many 
times in this House, where did all our dollars go? Well I’ve just 
outlined a few things where our dollars go. They go to invest in 
infrastructure for the future. They’ve gone to taking 112,000 
people right off the tax rolls altogether, saved them literally 
billions of dollars in tax savings. But you know, where does the 
money come from for all of these promises? I’d like to know 
where. And on top of all of this, Mr. Speaker, he favours a 
carbon tax to impose on the province of Saskatchewan which is 
going to even cripple our economy even more and lower the 
amount of tax dollars that are available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m just going to wrap up here momentarily, but I 
would just like to say that I am proud of the strong leadership in 
our Saskatchewan Party that they’ve shown to this province, 
turning our province from a have-not to a have province in the 
good times, and then formulating a sustainable plan to carry us 
through these challenging times. This has shown the most 
important qualities of strong leadership — clear-headedness; 
the ability to formulate a work plan, and it’s a workable work 
plan, Mr. Speaker; and the courage to carry out that plan. To 
keep your head when all about you are losing theirs, that’s what 
strong leadership is about, Mr. Speaker. Most importantly, it’s 
about accountability. 
 
I’d just like to wrap up by saying, Mr. Speaker, my wife, Linda, 
and I have three great kids that we are very proud of. And 
they’ve got three great spouses that we’re also proud of. And I 
would like to say they’re all employed here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and they’re paying taxes, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think even, with no disrespect to my kids but even more 
important, we’ve got five beautiful grandkids.  
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I stand here in this House today and say that 
I will do everything in my power to ensure that a party, a leader 
that proposes such loosey-goosey ideas with no plan to pay for 
them will never ever be able to form government. I will not 
have my children getting up in the morning and going to work 
knowing that at the end of the day, the government’s going to 
have their hand in their pocket to take half of that back to pay 
for such ill-founded, ill-planned program as this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to now adjourn debate on this motion. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from The Battlefords 
has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 



April 26, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4085 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that the House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:36.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

COMMEMORATIVE STATEMENTS 
 National Day of Mourning 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4061 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4061 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4061 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4061 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4062 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4062 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4065 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4065 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4062 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4062 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4062 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4063 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Nipawin Hawks Win Canalta Cup 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4063 
 Day of Mourning 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4063 
 Provincial Game Management Plan 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4063 
 Project Lifesaver Implemented in Saskatoon 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4064 
 2018 Tony Cote Winter Games 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4064 
 2017 Saskatoon Citizen of the Year 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4064 
 Support for Government Position on Carbon Pricing 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4065 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Support for Post-Secondary Institutes 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4065 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4066 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4066 
 Former Member and Irrigation Project Approval Process 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4066 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4066 
 Global Transportation Hub and Land Transactions 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4067 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4067 
 Global Transportation Hub and Government Transparency 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4067 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4067 
 Mental Health Services for Children 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4068 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4068 
 Support for Capital Infrastructure in the Education Sector 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4069 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4069 
 Commercial Development in Wascana Park 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4069 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4069 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Need for Pharmacare 
  Chartier ......................................................................................................................................................................... 4070, 4080 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4073 
  Meili ............................................................................................................................................................................... 4074, 4080 
  Buckingham .................................................................................................................................................................. 4075, 4080 



 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 4077, 4080 
  Heppner ......................................................................................................................................................................... 4078, 4081 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4079 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4080 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4080 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4081 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 2 — Opposition’s Fiscal Plan 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4081 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


