


















































March 19, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 30A  MONDAY, MARCH 19, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3471 
 March 19, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and Mines. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery, I 
would like to introduce Robin Dunlop, a friend of mine, and 
certainly a friend of the constituency of Stonebridge-Dakota in 
Saskatoon, where most recently she served as volunteer 
campaign Chair. 
 
Robin has been a successful business owner and entrepreneur 
for 14 years. She also served as Chair of the Saskatchewan 
Hearing Health Conference, which attracted audiologists and 
practitioners from across Western Canada. Previously she was 
also principal speech writer to Premier Devine and gained a 
strong reputation for her keen understanding of Saskatchewan’s 
political history. Robin currently serves on the board of 
directors for the Meewasin Valley Authority.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in 
welcoming Robin to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. To you and through you, I would like to introduce, 
seated in your gallery, Barb Wright. Barb is one of the 
constituency assistants for the constituency of Saskatoon 
Willowgrove. She’s had a distinguished career as a teacher in 
our province, some 30 years beginning in Moose Jaw and then 
in Saskatoon at Greystone Heights, Mayfair, and Silverwood 
Heights. 
 
When I talked to Barb, she reminds me when she was a teacher 
one of the highlights of her year was coming to the legislature 
with each and every group. We hope that it still remains a 
highlight as you see what goes on today, but most importantly 
we want to thank you for your service as a teacher and now as a 
constituency assistant, and welcome you to your Legislative 
Assembly. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to help me welcome 
Barb Wright. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade and Export 
Development. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to introduce to you and through you to 
members of the Assembly, in the west gallery, a 37-year retired 
public servant for the Ministry of the Environment, served 
different areas across the province, current Meadow Lake city 
councillor, volunteer in our community, member of the 
Saskatchewan Party provincial executive, and a friend to many 
on this side of the House and the opposite side as well. And it’s 
my dad, Tom Harrison, who is joining us today from Meadow 
Lake. So welcome to your Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Goudy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Porcupine 
Plain, Mistatim, and Bjorkdale, and I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of concerned citizens as it relates to the Sask 
Party’s cuts to post-secondary education. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
funding to Saskatchewan’s post-secondary institutions and 
stop the damaging cuts to our students. 

 
These petitions are signed by concerned citizens from Moose 
Jaw and Mortlach. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition calling on the Sask Party government to stop 
the cuts to our children’s classrooms. Those who’ve signed this 
petition today wish to draw our attention to the following: to the 
fact that this government took in an additional $67 million in 
education property tax last budget year but saw fit to cut $54 
million from our children’s classrooms. And of course, Mr. 
Speaker, these cuts have a had devastating impact across the 
province. We’ve seen cuts to specialized pre-K 
[pre-kindergarten] programs and cuts to classrooms in every 
corner of this province. So I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and stop making 
families, teachers, and everyone who works in our 
education system pay for this government’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
Moose Jaw, in Caronport, and in Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 



3472 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2018 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from the people of Saskatchewan 
calling on the government to appoint a seniors’ advocate, Mr. 
Speaker. They point out that seniors’ concerns under this 
government have not been a priority. They point to things like 
the cuts to the hearing aid plan, to podiatry services, to 
shuttering STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company], of 
increased prescriptions, the increase to long-term care. 
 
People have huge concerns that seniors are not a priority of this 
government, Mr. Speaker. The fact that Saskatchewan does not 
have legislated minimum care standards for long-term care and, 
even with continued reports and concerns for families on the 
issues in long-term care, this government has failed to ensure 
safety, quality of life, and dignity for seniors. And the 
petitioners believe a seniors’ advocate would provide vital 
support for seniors and their families across the province. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately appoint a 
seniors’ advocate to ensure the rights of seniors are upheld 
and that all seniors across the province have the supports 
they need and deserve. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I 
so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Yom HaShoah 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to bring 
attention to Yom HaShoah or Holocaust Remembrance Day, 
which will be observed on April 12th this year. Yom HaShoah 
is a day on which we reflect back on the atrocities of the 
Holocaust and remember the victims and countless acts of 
heroism that took place during the Holocaust. 
 
In Saskatoon, I was humbled to attend the 2018 Holocaust 
memorial service on March 18th at the Sanctuary of Jewish 
Community Centre sponsored by the Congregation Agudas 
Israel, along with the Minister of Justice and the Minister of 
Education. 
 
Robbie Waisman, a Holocaust survivor, gave a powerful 
keynote address. He told the story of tragedy and survival 
which highlighted the importance of remembering what 
happened during the Holocaust so that we may never allow 
such horrors to occur again. In fact, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Waisman 
spoke to 2,000 Saskatoon students on Thursday about the 
Holocaust. Mr. Speaker, with each passing year, we have fewer 
and fewer survivors of the Holocaust alive to tell their story, 
which is why it is so important that everyone here in 
Saskatchewan and around the world take time to remember the 
victims of the Holocaust. 
 
I ask that all members join me in observing Yom HaShoah on 
April 12th in remembering the victims of the Holocaust and to 

take action to ensure that the victims’ stories will never be 
forgotten. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

International Trade Legislative Conference 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this weekend I had the pleasure of attending, along with the 
members from Cannington, Last Mountain-Touchwood, and 
Saskatoon Fairview, the International Trade Legislative 
Conference in Quebec City. This conference brought together 
representatives from across North America to discuss the 
concern upon renegotiation or the potential cancellation of the 
NAFTA [North American Free Trade Agreement] agreement. 
 
NAFTA is incredibly important to our province and our 
country, accounting for 56 per cent of Saskatchewan’s exports. 
Millions of jobs are created thanks to this agreement, including 
nine million in Canada, five million in Mexico, and 14 million 
in the United States. But after more than 20 years, it’s important 
to revisit NAFTA to update and modernize the agreement and 
build upon the success we have already enjoyed across all three 
countries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the conference was to provide a forum for 
legislators to discuss any issues and ensure that a modernized 
agreement will have a positive impact on our provinces and 
states. Saskatchewan is an export-dependent province, and our 
government will continue to support policies and agreements 
that help our industries. 
 
This conference was an important step to learning more about a 
modernized NAFTA, and we will continue to work with our 
trading partners to the south and to provide the best 
arrangements for our Saskatchewan businesses. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Social Work Week  
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today and to recognize this week, March 18th to the 24th, as 
Social Work Week in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this year’s 
theme for Social Work Week is Bringing Change to Life. 
 
As a registered social worker, I am proud of the work my 
colleagues perform every day across the province. I know 
first-hand the dedication and compassion of Saskatchewan’s 
social workers. They provide essential supports to families, 
adults, and children, as well as important services ranging from 
crisis intervention, one-on-one counselling, group counselling, 
marriage and family therapy, addictions counselling, and child 
protection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right now many social workers are operating 
under difficult circumstances due to the callous cuts of this 
government. Saskatchewan social workers are already dealing 
with increased workloads, which would be made worse if there 
are more public service cuts in this upcoming budget. 



March 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3473 

The Saskatchewan Association of Social Workers governs the 
profession of social work in the province. The member-based 
organization was first established in October 1962 and has 
grown from an active membership of 83 to more than 1,800 
registered members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in expressing 
our gratitude to social workers across Saskatchewan during this 
week and commend them on the work they do every day to 
improving people’s lives in Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

Z99 Radiothon  
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this weekend marked Z99’s annual radiothon. For 31 years the 
Z99 morning crew has stayed up for over 36 straight hours to 
raise money for the Hospitals of Regina Foundation in support 
of the neonatal intensive care unit at the Regina General 
Hospital. This year the radiothon raised over $700,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the neonatal intensive care unit, also known as 
NICU, has been a crucial resource in Regina for the past 40 
years. Approximately 600 babies every year are treated. 
Throughout the fundraiser, people from across the province 
shared stories of the important role that the NICU unit has 
played in their lives. 
 
Inspiring stories of fundraising efforts were also shared, Mr. 
Speaker, stories like Tiara Schneider’s, who used the NICU unit 
when her son Brooks was born premature. She held a 
fundraising event over the weekend, promising to make a hat 
for every NICU baby for every $20 donated. She ended up 
raising over $7,000. That’s the commitment that people make in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the millions raised over by Z99 radiothon over the 
past 31 years have made a significant impact on the quality of 
lives and care for these mothers and their newborns. On behalf 
of everyone in this Assembly, I’d like to thank the Z99 team for 
their hard work on this fundraising, and for everyone in 
Saskatchewan who donated to this, such a worthwhile cause. So 
thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Champions of Mental Health Event 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 
March 17th I, along with the Minister for Advanced Education 
and the member from Regina Rosemont, attended the 
Champions of Mental Health event held by the Schizophrenia 
Society of Saskatchewan here in Regina. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, Michael Landsberg gave the keynote address. Mr. 
Landsberg captivated the audience with his testimonial on 
mental health, which he advocates through his charity Sick Not 
Weak. Mr. Landsberg made a couple of stops here in 

Saskatchewan before the event in Regina, visiting both 
Fond-du-Lac and The Battlefords to speak about mental illness 
and his own personal struggles with depression. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Michael’s profession revolves around 
communication, whether it’s on his show Off The Record, or 
over TSN [The Sports Network] radio. He now advocates that 
through communication we can end the stigma surrounding 
mental health. Michael strongly believes that the deeper a 
person can speak on his or her mental illness, the more a person 
can bond and realize that they’re not alone in their battle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to commend Executive Director Dr. 
Jamie Eng, President Bruce McKee of the Schizophrenia 
Society of Saskatchewan, and all the volunteers who worked so 
hard to ensure the gala was a successful fundraiser, especially 
our friend Joan Baylis who is a tireless advocate in the 
community of Regina for many different causes. I just want to 
say thank you to all the volunteers who made this a successful 
evening. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Reconciliation Through Treaty Education 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In February a 
memorandum of understanding was signed by the Federation of 
Sovereign Indigenous Nations, the Saskatchewan Indigenous 
Cultural Centre, the Office of the Treaty Commissioner, and the 
Saskatchewan School Boards Association on reconciliation 
through treaty education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this memorandum will serve as a tool to overcome 
obstacles that are affected by treaty relations. Treaty awareness 
and education both serve as vehicles to the elimination of 
systemic discrimination and will teach students across this 
province the importance and the spirit of the treaty. Those who 
signed the memorandum are confident that through education, 
reconciliation is achievable. 
 
Treaties hold a sacred covenant as well as respect international 
law, and it is important for our youth to learn the importance of 
these agreements. Treaty Commissioner Mary Culbertson said, 
and I quote, “Through education about the spirit, the intent, and 
the treaty relationship, reconciliation can one day be achieved. 
Education will be the vehicle to take us there.” 
 
This government stands behind treaty education, as it will 
benefit all Saskatchewan students. This memorandum 
complements many of the SSBA’s [Saskatchewan School 
Boards Association] resolutions adopted recently, including the 
call to all schools and school board offices in Saskatchewan to 
display the Treaty Symbol. Mr. Speaker, this Assembly looks 
forward to the positive impact that this memorandum of 
understanding will bring to the students of Saskatchewan. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 

Holocaust Memorial Service 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



3474 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2018 

this Sunday, along with the Attorney General and the member 
from Saskatoon Centre, I was humbled to attend the 2018 
Holocaust memorial service held at the Congregation Agudas 
Israel Synagogue in Saskatoon. This sombre occasion marked 
the annual remembrance of the horrific events of the Holocaust, 
where millions of innocent Jews and other minority groups 
were targeted and murdered. 
 
The keynote speaker this year was Robbie Waisman, a 
Holocaust survivor. Robbie was born in Poland and was the 
youngest of six children. Only he and his sister Leah survived 
the war. He worked as a slave labourer in an ammunitions 
factory in Buchenwald before being liberated. In addition to the 
memorial service, Robbie was able to address over 200 students 
at the Holy Family Cathedral in Saskatoon on Thursday and 
Friday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite the assured difficulty of speaking of such 
tragic experiences, Robbie continues to share his story. His 
goal, his hope is that sharing his message will inoculate as 
many people as possible against hatred. The Congregation 
Agudas Israel Synagogue shares this ideal as well. They have a 
long history of exceptional Holocaust education and 
remembrance, assisting in helping over 20,000 students hear 
first-hand accounts from survivors over the last 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education and remembrance is the fervent wish of 
survivors and the clear responsibility of today’s educators and 
leaders. So on behalf of everyone in this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to thank Robbie Waisman and Congregation 
Agudas Israel Synagogue, and all other survivors who educate 
others through their stories. We will never forget. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Response to Fentanyl Crisis 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday we lost two more 
Saskatchewan people to fentanyl overdoses, this time in 
Maidstone. It’s not just an urban problem. All over 
Saskatchewan, people are struggling to access mental health 
and addiction support and first response support when 
overdoses happen. I want to acknowledge and commend the 
Saskatoon Police Service for their quick response and highlight 
the Good Samaritan Drug Overdose Act that’s been adopted by 
Saskatoon and Prince Albert for allowing tainted drugs to be 
handed in without fear of prosecution or repercussion. 
 
This harm-reduction approach to policing is crucial for saving 
lives and creating safer communities. My question, Mr. 
Speaker, is how is the Sask Party government proactively 
addressing the fentanyl and crystal meth crises, recognizing that 
law enforcement is but one important piece of the puzzle? What 
harm-reduction measures are being undertaken to get ahead of 
these crises? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that the member 
opposite would raise this very important issue, most importantly 

with some of the incidences — a number of incidences now — 
that we have had in multiple communities here in the province 
of Saskatchewan with respect to opioids and fentanyl and some 
of them being laced, ultimately resulting in the death of a few 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would go even further to say that this is not just 
an urban issue in the province of Saskatchewan, as it is 
extending into some other communities. But it’s also an issue 
across the nation of Canada, as we have heard other 
jurisdictions in Canada also are looking at what they can do to 
address this ever-so-important issue to protect the citizens of 
our communities and of our province and of our nation, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We have had a number of initiatives over the last while, Mr. 
Speaker. They include investment in the combined forces 
special enforcement unit, as well as enhancing the operations of 
SCAN [safer communities and neighbourhoods], Mr. Speaker, 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. We’ve made naloxone 
kits available across the province as well, to an increasing 
degree, Mr. Speaker. But the fact remains that this will not be 
dealt with just through law enforcement. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition is correct, and we need to 
continually work . . . And I think I mentioned in one of the very 
early questions, if not the first question of this session, Mr. 
Speaker, this may be an opportunity where both sides of the 
House would be able to do some work together, Mr. Speaker, 
on behalf of the people of the province of Saskatchewan, in 
looking at the root issues of crime and some of the opportunities 
that we may have. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
commitment from the Premier to work together on this and to 
address it. We’ve heard that commitment to face this issue 
head-on, but the problem does continue to spread. We’ve seen 
fentanyl-laced cocaine showing up in communities like 
Kamsack and Weyburn. And the Sask Party has continued to 
limit the distribution of naloxone kits to pharmacies alone and 
has also limited the distribution of the Narcan Nasal Spray to 
first responders alone. 
 
Narcan, Mr. Speaker, it’s an authorized Canadian-made drug 
that is life saving. It temporarily reverses the effects of an 
opioid overdose, and having it available free of charge from 
community-based organizations has been a harm-reduction 
method that’s been shown to save lives in other jurisdictions. 
I’m wondering, Mr. Speaker, if the Sask Party government will 
follow that lead and make Narcan available free of charge to 
those community-based organizations to ensure ready 
accessibility of remedies to counteract overdoses. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I think we 
take that under advisement. And that’s a decision, or a 
conversation that we may be able to have here, Mr. Speaker, to 
ensure that those Narcan kits and naloxone kits are available to 
as many as possible here in the province of Saskatchewan. The 
RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] have provided these 



March 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3475 

kits to their officers here in the province. We have provided an 
additional $50,000 in funding, Mr. Speaker, for take-home kits 
as well so that they’ve actually now, Mr. Speaker, distributed 
almost 500 of those kits and trained 1,500 people in the 
province to recognize when and how to respond to these 
overdoses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are, there has been investment, Mr. Speaker, in making 
these kits accessible. As we move forward in the weeks and 
months, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important for us to have that 
discussion on, is there an opportunity for us to provide more 
accessibility to just those kits in light of recent occurrences here 
in the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Support for Truth and Reconciliation Calls to Action 
 

Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, it’s good to hear that there will be 
consideration of this. Going down that road to having Narcan 
available province-wide would really help in this moment of 
crisis, to have first responders well prepared. 
 
On Thursday, Mr. Speaker, the Premier committed to providing 
an update on the steps the government has taken and will take 
in carrying out the recommendations, the calls to action of the 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission. These calls to action, 
Mr. Speaker, represent an important tool for closing the gap in 
health, economic, and education outcomes between indigenous 
and non-indigenous people in the province. It’s a welcome and 
important commitment, Mr. Speaker, and not the first time 
we’ve heard a commitment to address those issues. 
 
So my question for the Premier, Mr. Speaker, is when, and in 
what form, can we expect that update? And importantly, will 
you commit, will the Premier commit to making that update 
right here in the House, in the people’s Assembly, so that 
attention to closing that all-important gap receives the 
high-priority attention that it deserves? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, again, a very important issue 
and a conversation for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I’m glad it’s been raised here today, Mr. 
Speaker, because last week in this House and in the rotunda I 
indicated that we’ve been active on 26 of the 34 
recommendations that are of provincial jurisdiction here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, 26 of 34 of the recommendations 
with respect to truth and reconciliation here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I was made aware after that point, Mr. Speaker, that we are 
actively working on an additional six as well on behalf of the 
people in our great province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
work that is ongoing, Mr. Speaker, and includes efforts such as 
being the first province in the nation to implement K to 12 
[kindergarten to grade 12] treaty education, Mr. Speaker, in 
classrooms across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So we are active on a number of the recommendations with 
respect to truth and reconciliation, Mr. Speaker. We will 
continue to be active on those into the future, Mr. Speaker, and 

I was glad to clarify the record here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Government Response to First Nations and Métis Nation 
of Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
Sixties Scoop was a very dark chapter in the history of our 
province. The effects are still causing real hurt in communities 
across the province, and they come with a tremendous social 
and financial cost that affects us all. For so many that were 
taken during the Sixties Scoop, what they need is healing and 
closure. An important part of that closure is an apology from 
the government for all the wrongs committed by governments 
of all stripes. 
 
Last week the government said that they would make an 
apology soon. Nearly three years ago the Saskatchewan Party 
said it was coming soon. So what does “soon” mean this time, 
Mr. Speaker? Does it mean three more years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And the answer is no; it shouldn’t be three more years, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re going to work very quickly with respect to 
reaching out again to First Nations leaders, as I said, the leaders 
of the Métis Nations in the province, as well as reaching out to 
Sixties Scoop survivors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’ll be looking to make that apology in the next number 
of weeks, possibly a few months. But, Mr. Speaker, this will not 
be extended into the format of years, Mr. Speaker, into the time 
frame of years. We’re going to be moving very quickly to shape 
that apology and make it as soon as we are able to on behalf of 
the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, everyone understands that this 
apology needs to happen, along with the consultations of 
indigenous leadership. No one is questioning that, Mr. Speaker. 
But using that as an excuse to refuse to move forward is 
unacceptable. An effective apology takes sincerity. It takes a 
genuine willingness to engage. Mr. Speaker, recognition of 
these acts of cultural assimilation and genocide are necessary 
for reconciliation. 
 
So in addition to scheduling the apology, will the government 
help us designate a day of memorial for residential schools and 
Sixties Scoop survivors to recognize the genocide of indigenous 
people that occurred to reflect upon these historical wrongs and 
show a real commitment through reconciliation? Will they do 
that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations; First Nations, Métis and Northern Affairs. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, we certainly understand 
the very respectful and meaningful tone that we must take when 
we move forward with our Sixties Scoop apology. And as 
we’ve talked about before, we need to have engagement with 



3476 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2018 

our First Nations and Métis communities, and I believe it’s fully 
up to them as to what part of our discussion we need to have to 
move this forward. So we’re looking for all input from our First 
Nations and Métis partners as to what we need to have in our 
Sixties Scoop apology and to move this forward as quickly as 
possible. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 

Management of Provincial Economy 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, while the Sask Party’s been busy 
mishandling all these important issues, they’ve also been 
mismanaging Saskatchewan’s economy. Now not all reports 
agree on everything, but in its updated economic forecast, TD 
[Toronto Dominion] Bank predicts that Saskatchewan will have 
the worst economic growth outside of the Maritimes in 2018. 
 
Now the Conference Board of Canada disagrees slightly, 
predicting that Saskatchewan will have the worst growth out of 
all the provinces in 2018. Other provinces are investing in 
people and communities, and they’re growing. But the Sask 
Party is cutting and privatizing, and we are falling behind. 
When will the Sask Party face the music and recognize that 
their heartless cuts and unfair tax hikes are hurting and not 
helping our economic recovery? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade and Export 
Development. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Here are the facts. RBC [Royal Bank of Canada] 
projects Saskatchewan will lead the country in economic 
growth in 2018 with a forecasted 2.9 per cent growth in GDP 
[gross domestic product]. 
 
Here’s some more facts, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan has the 
third-lowest unemployment rate in the entire country right now. 
We have created over 60,000 jobs over the course of the last 
decade, Mr. Speaker — the second-best rate of job creation in 
the entirety of the country. And I will put that record up against 
their record any day of the week, because their record, Mr. 
Speaker, was the exact opposite of that. In their last 10 years in 
government, what was their job creation record, Mr. Speaker? 
The worst in Canada. 
 
The Speaker: — Opposition Whip. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, one cherry-picked report doesn’t 
change the fact: from unemployment to new housing starts, 
from agriculture to business and restaurants and hotels, 
Saskatchewan is falling behind. That’s not a debate point, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a fact. But the Sask Party are too busy defending 
their own mismanagement to notice. 
 
Tens of millions have been wasted on the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] alone. Millions wasted on lawsuits. 
Millions wasted on the growing debt. Millions wasted and 
handed to Sask Party supporters. So much public money 
wasted, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the Minister of Trade Development briefly told us what he 
thinks about the GTH, the Deputy Premier committed to a 

public inquiry, and the Premier obviously acknowledges the 
size of the problems at the GTH because he asked the Attorney 
General to be in charge of it. So for how much longer are they 
going to keep defending their GTH scandal and the tens of 
millions of dollars they wasted on it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade and Export 
Development. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well we finally get some economic 
commentary from the NDP [New Democratic Party] and they 
refer to the Royal Bank of Canada as having cherry-picked 
numbers, Mr. Speaker. I would venture to suggest that they 
would disagree with that opinion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we’re seeing developing is a very, very clear choice, Mr. 
Speaker, between the opposition and this government opposite. 
We see on this side common sense ideas, Mr. Speaker. On that 
side what we’re seeing, unrealistic and massive, massive 
spending plans, $2.5 billion. 
 
On this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we are standing up to 
Justin Trudeau. We are defending the economic interests of this 
province and we are opposing a tax being imposed on 
Saskatchewan by the Liberal government. What are we seeing 
on that side, Mr. Speaker? The white flag. The Leader of the 
Opposition advocating that we do what Trudeau wants, that we 
impose a carbon tax on our people. Mr. Speaker, we are not 
going to surrender to Justin Trudeau like that member would 
want us to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, all huffing and puffing aside, 
what that minister is failing to do is to acknowledge that they 
are relying on one report from the RBC. But both the TD Bank 
and the Conference Board paint a much different picture. So if 
he wants to talk about cherry picking, that’s the cherry picking 
that he should be talking about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this minister face the facts, deal with 
the facts, and report the facts to the public? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade and Export 
Development. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well I am very happy to stand up in 
this House every day of the week and defend this government’s 
record on the economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since 2007, capital investment in this province has increased by 
70 per cent. The population of this province has grown, Mr. 
Speaker, by over 160,000, a rate of growth that we have not 
seen in Saskatchewan since the 1930s. 
 
We also know what their record is, and the problem for them is 
the people of this province also remember what their record is 
— the worst job creation record in Canada, people fleeing in 
droves, our young people having to leave this province to find 
opportunity. 
 
Things have changed, Mr. Speaker. A government on this side 
that puts a priority on ensuring economic growth, the third 



March 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3477 

lowest unemployment rate in Canada, the second best rate in the 
entire country of job creation over the course of the last decade, 
versus their record of failure. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They’re trying to 
convince us that two plus two equals a bushel of potatoes. The 
people of Saskatchewan are not buying it. Mr. Speaker, they 
can’t simply wish away their own bad management, and they 
can’t simply wish away workers’ rights either. Their attempt to 
cut 3.5 per cent from workers across the province has been an 
abject failure, Mr. Speaker. And now the Premier says that he 
wants to cut 5 per cent more. 
 
Support workers in our kids’ classrooms have pushed back 
against these cuts and have earned a modest increase. 
Meanwhile, for the first time in Saskatchewan’s history, 
teachers are heading to arbitration and we won’t have an answer 
to that contract until the next school year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Education admit that their tax 
and cuts are hurting our kids’ classrooms, and will he commit 
today to showing a little more respect to the people who work 
in our kids’ classrooms every day? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, this government has 
demonstrated its commitment to public education, Mr. Speaker 
. . . I lost my train of concentration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, just a month ago, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I have no idea. Okay, what do we do? We 
wait it out? Can we recess? Can we recess? We’ll recess while 
we check out the buzzer. 
 
All right. Okay, I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Let’s see if I can regain my thought, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a month ago I was proud to stand in the 
rotunda of this building, Mr. Speaker, when our Premier stood 
up and announced seven and a half million dollars in in-year 
funding for public education, Mr. Speaker. That annualizes to 
$30 million, Mr. Speaker. That demonstrates, that shows this 
government’s commitment to ensuring that we increase 
resources to the classroom, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s on top, Mr. Speaker, of the significant commitments that 
this government has made over the last number of years when it 
comes to infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. So this government is 
committed to continuing to support children in our classroom, 
Mr. Speaker. We understand how important ensuring that 
education is for our children, Mr. Speaker. You can continue to 
expect, Mr. Speaker, that this government will support children 
in our classrooms, and continue to support with the proper 
amount of funding. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 

Public Service, Crown Corporations, and 
Government-Owned Buildings 

 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard a lot of talk about 
pants being on fire over the years, but that’s the first time I’ve 
ever seen that government set off the fire alarm. 
 
You know, certainly when it comes to the record, Mr. Speaker, 
this is a government that added three new MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] positions. They’ve got at least a couple 
more by-elections coming up at about $400,000 a pop, but they 
aren’t looking themselves in the mirror, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Instead they’re going after some of the hardest working and 
lowest paid people in the entire public service. Last year it was 
the people who clean the offices in this, the people’s Legislative 
Building. Now they’re targeting the people who work in the 
cafeteria. How on earth can the Minister of Central Services 
justify helping themselves while attacking these hard-working 
men and women? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much for the 
question. Mr. Speaker, the member opposite can rest assured 
that this government is concerned about each and every 
taxpayer dollar, Mr. Speaker. The Dome cafeteria was the last 
government-run cafeteria. In 2016 it lost $33,000. In 2017 it 
lost $39,000. What we’re doing is going out to the private 
sector for proposals to see how we can operate this in a more 
efficient fashion, and one that is more cognizant of taxpayers’ 
dollars. Now we know members opposite aren’t too worried 
about taxpayers’ dollars. The Leader of the Opposition has 
already spent $2.5 billion of taxpayers’ money, even before he 
takes over. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the problem is we didn’t hear a 
darn thing about that from this government in the last election. 
They did say though that they would protect our Crowns, but 
then of course they put everything from SaskTel to government 
buildings on the chopping block. And last week at the SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 
convention, the Minister of Central Services said, and I quote, 
“There are 660 government buildings across Saskatchewan. 
That’s something I became aware of when I became minister. I 
think that’s too many.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, it begs a couple of questions. If 660 is too many, 
then what’s the right number? And, Mr. Speaker, the second 
question is this: if they succeed in selling them off, if the garage 
sale goes through, will they then make a guarantee that they 
won’t be renting them back, having sold them off? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thanks very much. Each year this 
government meets with groups like SARM, like SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], like the 
Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, and they challenge us to 
make sure that the government footprint is as small as possible 



3478 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2018 

so we can concentrate on our priorities like health care and 
education and social services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Each and every day, again we’re concerned about each and 
every taxpayer’s dollar. Mr. Speaker, we’re not ideologically 
driven when it comes to this. If a government building can be 
better operated by another level of government or the private 
sector, so be it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can just turn to the forestry centre. You know, 
that was a building that had a lot of controversy when it was 
first established. Now it’s being operated by the University of 
Saskatchewan, much to the delight of the city of Prince Albert 
and area. I think all members on this side of the House and the 
member opposite would agree that that’s the best use for that 
facility. 
 
If there are other examples like that in Melville or other places, 
we’re asking the people who were elected in other capacities to 
let this government know. And again we will be responsible for 
each and every taxpayer dollar. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, how many government buildings 
are they looking to sell off? What’s the right number? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, what we are 
committed to do is to look at each and every one of those 
buildings and to assure that they are operating in the proper 
fashion and that they are in their highest and best use. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite again are being 
hypocritical. I know that it happens quite often in question 
period. But again, when they were in government . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . And one of the former ministers there is letting 
us know his opinion. They sold off the Echo Valley Conference 
Centre in 2004. They sold off the Diocese of Qu’Appelle site in 
Regina in 2003, and they sold off the Souris Valley Regional 
Care Centre in 2003. Again, Mr. Speaker, I know they’re a 
different group, they say, over there. This is a group that now is 
spending $2.5 billion of taxpayers’ money in the hope of them 
getting elected. Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the House 
will make sure that that never happens. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, a lot of volume but not a lot of 
answers. So I’ll try it again, Mr. Speaker. He said that 660 
buildings is too many, you know, and I’d be interested in 
knowing how he arrived at that being too many. But I guess the 
question we’re looking for the answer to is, how many is the 
right number? Is he looking to sell off two-thirds? Is he looking 
to sell off all 660? What’s the right number? 
 
If he’s got an opinion on it being too many, Mr. Speaker, surely 
he wouldn’t be so irresponsible as to come forward and say 
that, you know, it’s just a wide open garage sale, a fire sale 
where everything must go, Mr. Speaker. Surely he’s got a right 

number in mind. And what is that number? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much. As I 
indicated in the previous answer, Mr. Speaker, we are 
concerned about each and every one of those buildings, and we 
want to make sure that they’re used in their highest and best 
capacity, whether that’s by the Government of Saskatchewan or 
again if we’re talking to 2,000 elected leaders of SARM and 
asking them if they have some ideas. Not all good ideas come 
from under the dome of this building and from members 
opposite. We’re asking members for their highest and best use. 
And I’ve already received an inquiry from Melville, for 
example, Mr. Speaker. 
 
People want to make sure that each and every taxpayer’s dollar 
goes as far as it can, and that’s something that members on this 
side of the House take very seriously. And we will continue to 
do it by judiciously looking at every building that this 
government owns. 
 
The Speaker: — Well that was a very spirited debate. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 

Federal-Provincial Agreement to Support  
Early Learning and Child Care 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, last Friday I had the pleasure of announcing a 
three-year bilateral agreement with the federal government to 
deepen our commitment to early learning and child care in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this agreement allocates $41 
million of new dollars over three years toward expanding access 
to child care in this province. 
 
I was pleased to be joined in this announcement by the Hon. 
Ralph Goodale, attending on behalf of the Hon. Jean-Yves 
Duclos, Minister of Families, Children and Social 
Development. And I was extremely grateful for the federal 
co-operation to make this agreement. It will have a tremendous 
positive impact on our children, Mr. Speaker. I was also pleased 
to make the announcement at the Seven Stones Child Care 
Centre, a facility built by our government, located right here in 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to take a moment to recognize and 
thank early childhood educators and care providers for the 
important contributions they make to children, Saskatchewan’s 
children and families, across this province. In Saskatchewan 
with our growing economy, we have an ever-increasing demand 
for early learning and child care as more parents want to enter 
the workforce or pursue post-secondary education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize the value of early learning and care 
opportunities for our youngest citizens in supporting positive 
social and emotional development, early literacy, and school 
achievement. That’s why this learning and child care is a 



March 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3479 

priority for our government. In just the first year of our 
government, Mr. Speaker, we added 500 licensed child care 
spaces. Since then we have increased funding to child care 
spaces by $13 million. We’ve expanded the number of licensed 
child care spaces by almost 6,000 and we have over doubled the 
number of early years pre-K program spaces. 
 
Using this funding we will be able to continue to meet the 
priorities identified in Saskatchewan’s first ever early years 
plan by introducing 2,515 new licensed child care spaces. With 
these new spaces, we will have an increased number of licensed 
child care spaces by approximately 75 per cent since 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to point out a few other notable features of 
this agreement. This agreement includes 1,500 spaces targeted 
to group and family care facilities. We value our minority 
language groups, and as such, there are 65 spaces specifically 
allocated to francophone communities.  
 
We have also allocated funding for pilot programs designed to 
provide early year opportunities for children 3 to 4 who require 
intensive supports. This includes partnering with school 
divisions to deliver these pilots. Finally, we will be improving 
the quality of our early learning and child care sector by 
investing in educator training, operational supports, licence 
improvements, programming grants, and literacy supports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, communities across Saskatchewan are in need of 
licensed child care. Over the next few months, many 
communities in Saskatchewan will be also allocated new 
spaces. It’s our goal to have all the new spaces opened as soon 
as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is very good news for Saskatchewan children 
and families. Our children represent our future, and every dollar 
we invest in our children now will pay dividends decades into 
the future through healthier, happier adults. I want to thank the 
federal government for partnering with our government to 
deliver much needed supports to our province’s families. We 
are grateful for this investment in our future. 
 
These new child care spaces represent just how great our 
government’s commitment to Saskatchewan children is. We 
will continue to priorize our children’s future by taking care of 
them now, and we are keeping Saskatchewan strong by years to 
come by doing so. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to 
respond and thank you to the minister for that important 
announcement. I did regard the news release this weekend and 
some of the coverage with regard to the allocation of these 
federal funds, with much interest, and I know that this is an area 
that we do need. I share that with the minister. This is an area in 
this province that desperately needs investment. And I note that 
this $41 million over the next three years represents about three 
times the increase that we’ve seen over the last number of years, 
and that need has only continued to grow in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
From the Saskatchewan early years plan, we know that every 
dollar that we invest in this area in early learning, quality early 

learning and child care, we return between 4 and $9 back in 
revenue. So not only is this important for families to meet the 
needs that they are experiencing today with regard to 
availability of child care spaces and quality early years 
education, it also is an important economic investment in this 
province. And I think it’s important that we view child care and 
early learning not simply as an expense, but as an investment in 
these children and an investment in the future of this province. 
 
I do look forward to perhaps some more details, Mr. Speaker, 
with regard to this funding from the federal government, this 
$41 million. And some of the areas that we continue to have 
questions about I would just, I think, be remiss not to bring up 
here.  
 
Just with regard to retention, I know that the minister noted the 
degree to which those who work in early childhood centres and 
in early childhood programs how much they’re valued but, Mr. 
Speaker, we hear consistently about the need to address rates of 
compensation and to address the turnover within those systems. 
And so hopefully, that’s something with this money that will 
free up other money to look at that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But again, I will have more questions later when we move into 
committee perhaps, Mr. Speaker, but I would like to join with 
the minister in welcoming these federal dollars, this $41 million 
in this investment in the very important area of early child care 
and early learning, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the House 
Services Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on House Services to report that the committee has 
considered standing committee memberships and to present its 
ninth report. I move: 
 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Chair of 
House Services Committee: 
 

That the ninth report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 



3480 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2018 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 121 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) 
Act. This bill will implement a provincial regulatory scheme for 
legalized cannabis in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, federal Bill C-45 is expected to come into force in 
the summer of 2018. Once in force, that bill will implement a 
federal framework to provide restricted access to legalized 
cannabis in Canada. In response to the federal government’s 
decision to legalize cannabis, it is necessary for the province to 
pass cannabis legislation to regulate those matters that fall 
under provincial jurisdiction or are otherwise not addressed 
within the federal scheme. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a primary focus of the proposed provincial 
legislation is to ensure the health and safety of citizens. In 
particular, protecting minors from the harmful effects of 
cannabis is an important goal for government. Under the federal 
legislation, the minimum age for the consumption and 
possession of cannabis is 18. Further, the federal legislation 
allows minors under the age of 18 to possess up to five grams of 
cannabis with no consequences. Mr. Speaker, the federal 
government has made it clear that provinces may adopt a higher 
minimum age of consumption and possession for minors. 
Additionally the federal government has encouraged provinces 
to adopt provincial laws to address minors who possess less 
than five grams of cannabis. 
 
The proposed legislation will prohibit the possession, 
consumption, or distribution of cannabis by minors under the 
age of 19. This is in line with the province’s legal age for 
consumption of alcohol. It also aligns with the minimum age 
chosen by many other provinces and territories. This Act will 
also allow police to issue tickets to minors who are found in 
possession of cannabis, and to seize that cannabis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation contains further rules respecting 
the sale and possession and consumption of cannabis by adults. 
The Act will prohibit the consumption of cannabis by adults in 
public places or in vehicles. Individuals that wish to consume 
cannabis will be required to do so in a private location such as 
their home or cottage. The legal possession and distribution 
limits set by this legislation will mirror the limits set within the 
federal Act. In particular adults will be allowed to possess up to 
30 grams of dried cannabis in public and grow up to four plants 
within their private households. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation will also allow for the 
establishment and regulation of a private system for the retail 
sale, distribution, and wholesaling of cannabis in the province. 
This system will be administered and regulated by the 
provincial cannabis authority, which is expected to be 
designated as the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. 
Cannabis permittees will be required to comply with all the 
rules, terms, and conditions that are established by this Act, the 
regulations, and SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 

Authority]. This approach will ensure that the sale and 
distribution of cannabis is conducted in a safe and reliable 
manner while providing new economic opportunities for 
Saskatchewan businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government recognizes that certain 
municipalities and First Nations do not want retail cannabis 
stores operating within their community. As a result under this 
legislation, retail permits will not be issued in communities that 
choose to prohibit retail cannabis stores. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is committed to ensuring the 
health and safety of the people of Saskatchewan. The 
legalization of cannabis is a complex topic, and there is no 
doubt that our regulatory system will develop and evolve over 
time as we gain experience in this area. However, I am 
confident that the proposed legislation will implement a safe 
and effective regulatory system for the sale, possession, and 
consumption of legal cannabis in this province. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of 
The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 121, The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I recognize 
the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased on behalf of the opposition caucus to rise in my place 
today to again offer our perspective on the bills as they’re being 
introduced by the current government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 121, The Cannabis Control 
(Saskatchewan) Act, Mr. Speaker, talks about the legalization of 
cannabis throughout the country as the federal government has 
certainly made the commitment a couple of years ago to deal 
with the whole notion around cannabis in general. 
 
This bill creates a regulatory framework for legalized cannabis 
and, as indicated by the minister, there are key elements in the 
framework which talks about consuming cannabis in public 
places being prohibited. Possession of more than 30 grams and 
more than four plants is prohibited. People under 19 years of 
age are prohibited from possessing or consuming cannabis, and 
it’s punishable by a fine up to $2,000. Possession of cannabis in 
a vehicle is prohibited except when transporting it from the 
place it was obtained to the place it will be consumed. And 
finally, Mr. Speaker, rules for retail stores selling cannabis are 
also established in this bill. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve indicated from time to time again, 
it’s on numerous . . . and pretty par for the course when it 
comes to the Saskatchewan Party is they’re always late for 
preparing for something that they know is coming down as law. 
And there’s no question that this was a promise made by the 
federal Liberal government when they were elected in 2015. 
 
And this is no surprise, Mr. Speaker, that the cannabis bill is 
coming forward. And it’s just over the last several weeks that 
the Saskatchewan Party government has come forward 



March 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3481 

responding to the efforts by the federal government to make this 
. . . or the plans by the federal government to make cannabis 
legal throughout the country. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of things that we want to 
certainly support in the bill itself, as an opposition party. First 
of all, Mr. Speaker, the New Democrats support the minimum 
age of 19 and the prohibition on consumption in public places. 
We think that’s obviously that first step to make sure that we 
protect the younger children, those that aren’t able to make 
some significant critical decisions in their young lives. And I 
think it’s important that we do all we can to protect children and 
youth and families from the effects of drug use throughout the 
province. There’s no question that we, as an elected individual, 
that we often see the ravages of illicit drug use in not only our 
cities and our country but certainly in our northern communities 
as well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that when it comes to 
the whole notion of cannabis and the legalization of cannabis by 
the federal government, there’s got to be some key components 
when we talk about discussion and how we move this agenda 
forward. There’s no question from our perspective, Mr. 
Speaker, that some of the quick values that people see as a 
result of this federal law, Mr. Speaker . . . As much as we don’t 
want to recognize that illicit drug use is very difficult on 
families, we want to point out that sometimes when we look at 
the actual law being proposed by the federal government, that 
when you overcriminalize the use of cannabis, it certainly ties 
up a lot of the court processes. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that if we’re to spend much 
more of our time in the court system dealing with the harder 
drugs that are out there in our cities and in our country and in 
our northern communities — the harder drugs like crystal meth, 
Mr. Speaker, and fentanyl, and of course cocaine, and the list 
goes on, Mr. Speaker — if we overcriminalize cannabis, it’ll 
really tie up the courts, and perhaps the better, smarter use of 
the court system would deal with the harder drugs that are 
certainly out there. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the other point that we wanted to talk about 
is certainly the notion around engaging the industry for the 
responsible administration of this federal law. I know for a fact, 
Mr. Speaker, that there has been a call for solid discussions 
around this matter. Both the Saskatchewan Party government 
and the opposition have been subjected to numerous 
presentations by people involved with the retail sector or 
certainly the dispensary services, Mr. Speaker. So there’s no 
question that one of the issues that the craft dispensaries are 
indicating to the government is that there ought to be a 
grandfathering clause for those who have entered this particular 
industry knowing full well that the federal government was 
going to legalize cannabis. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what the current industry players have done 
is they’ve approached not only the opposition, but they’ve also 
approached the Saskatchewan Party government. We know that 
there was written documentation sent to both the Minister of 
Justice and also to the Minister for SLGA. I understand that the 
Minister of SLGA received a letter, responded to that letter, and 
did not agree to have any meeting with some of the current 
industry players, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, at the very 

least, the Minister from SLGA responded to the letter sent to 
him by one particular industry representative, and the Minister 
of Justice did not, did not respond to the letter, did not respond 
to a call for having discussions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s exactly what some of the industry 
players are indicating to us as legislators, is that we have to 
make sure we have that robust discussion on how we make sure 
that the intent behind cannabis and to make sure it’s legalized, 
is that to ensure it doesn’t . . . It follows through with what its 
intent is, as discussed in the federal bill, to ensure the safety of 
our children, to make sure it’s responsibly used and that there 
are ways and means and measures in which we could certainly 
monitor those that may be having too much cannabis, and of 
course, driving on our streets and being a threat to us all. So 
there’s no questions, Mr. Speaker, we have to take a lot of time 
to discuss this bill. 
 
There’s a lot of issues that I want to touch on as it comes to the 
harder drugs. I want to focus on the matter that I spoke about 
earlier, in a sense that it is a bit rich coming from the 
Government of Saskatchewan that are not engaging industry to 
the extent that they should, Mr. Speaker, on this original bill or 
this original matter around cannabis. 
 
And as we’ve said before, we agree with the two perspectives of 
being 18 years of age and prohibiting those that want to use 
cannabis in public places. We support those particular points of 
the bill, Mr. Speaker. But here’s where we don’t agree with the 
current government as we move forward. Some people see the 
value, some people see the value of not over-criminalizing 
cannabis as it does tie up the court system. And others see the 
value that, as you reduce the court system challenges and 
pressures on dealing with cannabis, it allows the justice system 
to free up valuable court time to deal with the harder drugs that 
are out there challenging our families and our youth and even 
our children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is why I want to go back to my point earlier: it is a bit 
rich for the government to tout the cannabis bill as being 
something that the federal government’s imposing upon them. 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, they’re not sending, they’re not 
providing one bit of help to many of these communities that are 
struggling with the major addictions of the more potent drugs 
that are out there. 
 
We see this on a continual basis, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s 
mental health therapy or whether it’s just health help in general, 
Mr. Speaker, whether it’s counselling services that are required. 
Many communities, not only throughout Saskatchewan but 
even the northern part of the province, are crying for more and 
more services to help reclaim families and young people and 
even children, as I mentioned, that are getting caught up in the 
drug trade, Mr. Speaker, and the effects are being felt by many 
of our northern communities. We need to have services to fight 
for the people to come off these drugs and to reclaim them 
because many times, Mr. Speaker, as we deal with the drug 
issue throughout the province . . . 
 
Most people know me as being a very, very anti-drug advocate, 
and I think one of the things that’s really important is that as we 
pursue the notion around dealing with harder drugs, Mr. 
Speaker, we have to have two principles in mind. Number one 



3482 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2018 

is to recognize and understand the ravages of illicit drug use in 
all of our families. And many families are being impacted, Mr. 
Speaker. And the second thing is to not be judgmental, to not 
judge those that are getting caught up in this particular activity 
because, Mr. Speaker, many of them are highly valuable people 
in our province and in our communities, in our groups, in our 
organizations, in our families. 
 
So it’s important to note that there are many valuable people 
that just get caught up in this particular activity and that they do 
need help and they do need understanding in getting themselves 
off this addiction because, Mr. Speaker, they are very, very 
valuable Saskatchewan people that we need to make sure that 
we give them the opportunity to seek that help. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in many of our northern communities . . . 
And this is why I get a bit angry with the Saskatchewan Party 
government when they turn around and talk about cannabis and 
what the federal government is trying to do to our young 
people, Mr. Speaker. They’ve used that argument before. But, 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is there’s harder drugs in our community, 
harder than ever; whether it’s crystal meth or whether it’s 
cocaine that’s laced with fentanyl, Mr. Speaker, or whether it’s 
heroin. And what we see is that the current government is not 
doing anything to help some of these communities combat these 
harder drugs coming into our schools, coming into our 
playgrounds, coming into our homes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need more action from this government to make sure that 
there are services available, counselling services to reclaim 
these people. And there’s nothing coming from this current 
government, Mr. Speaker, to combat those harder drug 
challenges that many communities and many families face 
throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
So I’m going to watch with very close interest, Mr. Speaker, 
how this government deals with this particular bill. Are they 
going to run back to their argument that oh, all drugs are evil, 
and that’s the problem, Mr. Speaker? Absolutely all illicit drugs 
are bad for the community. Nobody’s arguing that, Mr. 
Speaker. But the corresponding argument I would have for 
them is, what are they doing to reclaim the people that are being 
impacted by illicit drug use? Are they providing counselling 
services? 
 
And I look at some of my own communities in my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker — no services whatsoever to help 
reclaim these families, Mr. Speaker. And the system that is 
pushing many of these young people towards illicit drug use, 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no intervention to help. The schools are all 
alone in trying to stem many of the families being impacted by 
the harder drugs, as I talked about earlier. And, Mr. Speaker, 
there is no help for them. Grandparents that are raising young 
people that are struggling with these addictions, there’s no help 
for them as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as many of the communities begin to struggle with more 
and more people getting caught up in the illicit drug use, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s less and less help from the Government of 
Saskatchewan. And I say to them, that’s a crying shame 
because these are Saskatchewan people who are highly 
valuable, and we should do everything we can to help them 
recover from this tremendous strain that they’re under, and this 

terrible and heavy addiction that they have. There’s nothing 
there to help these families out of that predicament, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And that’s why today, from our perspective, as the federal 
government legalizes cannabis, we’re not advocating for the use 
of drugs. That’s not what this is about, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
saying that if you overcriminalize cannabis, you’re tying up the 
court system. We must educate, and we must help the people 
recover. So as we shift gears to the harder drugs and saying, 
okay, if we don’t overcriminalize cannabis, are we freeing up 
resources? Are we freeing up valuable resources to combat the 
heavier and harder drugs that are ravaging our communities? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s an answer that the Saskatchewan 
Party government cannot answer today. 
 
And this is the important point that many people in industry are 
also asking. What are we doing as a society to help those that 
want to combat the harder drugs out there that are ravaging our 
communities? Many of the people that we speak to in industry 
itself talk about those compelling challenges that many families 
and many communities face across our province. So I think it’s 
really, really important, Mr. Speaker, that we have this 
discussion. 
 
Now I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, as you look at some of the 
efforts of some of the communities in my region — and one of 
the communities I’m very proud of is the community of 
Beauval — they have, at many occasions, tried their very best 
to try and help stem some of the challenges around drug use and 
the effects it has in our communities. And, Mr. Speaker, 
Beauval’s been working very closely with a number of 
organizations. There’s two particular organizations that have an 
effort to try and provide services to families being caught up in 
the harder drugs — such as I mentioned, cocaine and crack, and 
of course things like fentanyl and heroin and so on and so forth. 
 
These drugs are coming north. They have been in the North for 
a long time, and people across the North have been calling for 
services to reclaim these lives. We think, Mr. Speaker, that is a 
very, very sound proposal that’s being asked for by the people 
of some of the northern communities.  
 
Governments, you need to help people recover from these 
addictions. And right now you have no help whatsoever offered 
in these communities. So don’t stand up and start talking about 
the drug issues in our communities without putting money 
where your mouth is because, Mr. Speaker, as I said at the 
outset, many families, many youth, many people are deserving 
of help and we need to provide them with as much service as 
we possibly can to get them away from this addiction. That is 
something that is absolutely paramount to some of the thinking 
that we have as the New Democratic Party when it comes to the 
whole notion around this particular bill because this bill elicits 
that larger discussion around the harder drugs. There’s no 
question about that in my mind, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And going back to the community of Beauval, I’m not sure of 
one of the groups that have been organized by the mayor 
himself, but there’s another organization called Greenleaf, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re looking at ways in which they could recover, 
help families recover, because this is a critical missing piece. 
And I often tell people in my communities a couple of things. I 



March 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3483 

say to them, you know, it’s important to note that as you look 
around some of the communities — not just in the North, it’s 
every community in the province — we have a problem with 
illicit drugs affecting many of our families. We cannot deny that 
it’s a part of our lives. 
 
[14:45] 
 
So what do we do? What do we do? And what I point out to 
people in my constituency is that as you look around these 
northern communities, what programs are there to help the 
people that get caught up in these addictions? What facility is 
there to help them recover? What effort is there on behalf of the 
government to help these communities reclaim these young 
people or some adults or some children being caught up in this 
particular trade? Absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker. Nothing is 
being done to counter the effects and certainly the introduction 
of some of these harder drugs in these northern communities. 
And that is a crying shame, Mr. Speaker, because these are 
Saskatchewan people deserving of help. 
 
If they come forward asking for help, Mr. Speaker, they should 
have services available. They should have counsellors available. 
They should have facilities that they can go to, Mr. Speaker. 
And I can tell you thousands of examples of people that have 
talked to me over the years as the MLA on how they need help. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know in northern Saskatchewan a lot of 
grandparents raise their grandkids. They help their own children 
raise the younger ones. And I can tell you many grandparents 
struggle with the teenagers as they get older, that they get 
introduced to some of these drugs. And many of them cry, 
many of them cry, saying that we’re finding it so difficult to 
deal with our grandson or granddaughter when it comes to 
illegal drug use, and there doesn’t seem to be any help out 
there, no help whatsoever. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s why we pay very close attention to this 
bill. We want to see if this government stops playing politics 
with this bill and starts providing promise with this bill, by 
promising to put healing centres in northern Saskatchewan, 
where people could finally go instead of having to relocate from 
their northern communities, either to a centre in the South, and 
in many cases to the jails in the South. Mr. Speaker, perhaps 
there’s an opportunity, and perhaps there’s hope for recovery, if 
we had these healing centres and recovery centres right in our 
community. 
 
And that’s why I commend the community of Beauval so much. 
I think they’ve figured this out, that it’s something that’s really, 
really important. I also commend the schools that are doing all 
they can to educate the young children that they have in their 
care, and the youth they have in their care, about the dangers of 
drug use. I also commend and recognize the role models out 
there, Mr. Speaker, role models that go out there and advocate 
for a drug-free life, and something that we should always do, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I commend those that organize walks — you know, walks 
throughout the community, healing walks that tell people that 
there is a better way, that we needn’t all reach out to drugs. I 
commend those that provide hope to those that are struggling 
with drug addictions, especially the hard addictions that I spoke 

about earlier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this bill, this bill that’s being forwarded by the government 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, it is irresponsible of them to not 
engage industry, the current industry, and having robust 
discussions, and having really good discussions around what 
their role would be, Mr. Speaker. It is not as if some of the 
current players did not reach out by way of telephone calls, by 
way of letters, asking for meetings, asking to be engaged, only 
to be met with no response or the answer from the current 
minister of SLGA: thanks for your concern, but we’re not going 
to meet with you. Mr. Speaker, that is not the approach that the 
government should be taking as it deals with current people that 
are involved with the dispensaries throughout the communities. 
 
I think that there should be . . . Those discussions should 
happen and, Mr. Speaker, the discussions should happen in a 
very formal, professional, and intelligent way. If that’s not 
being provided by the Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. 
Speaker — which I doubt will happen because we’ve seen them 
time and time again go back to their old, tired politics as 
opposed to having good, solid discussions, Mr. Speaker — I 
fear that the next action of some of these current players will be 
through the court system, Mr. Speaker. And that defeats the 
whole process that we spoke about earlier as we deal with the 
legalization of cannabis. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, our caucus has a lot of discussion around this 
particular bill. I know many more of my learned colleagues, 
those that are engaged with industry itself, Mr. Speaker, and are 
aware of the legal framework of how this could be implemented 
properly, Mr. Speaker, of how we could use this as an 
opportunity if there is a generation of funds for government, 
that it would be used to provide services to combat the harder 
drugs that are threatening our families and our communities and 
our way of life. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have more on this particular bill, as I’ve 
indicated, and I’ll look forward to some of the comments of my 
colleagues as they have put a lot of thought into this particular 
bill. So on that note I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 
121, the cannabis control Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 121, The Cannabis Control 
(Saskatchewan) Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

Bill No. 122 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2018/Loi de 2018 corrélative 
de la loi intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I will now rise to move 
second reading of The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2018. This bill will make 
consequential amendments to bilingual legislation that are 
necessary to implement the cannabis control Act. Mr. Speaker, I 
previously noted that the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 



3484 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2018 

Authority is expected to be designated as the provincial 
cannabis authority. The proposed amendments in this bill will 
update SLGA’s current legislation to clarify that SLGA is 
responsible for the regulation and control of any other matters 
that may be assigned to it. This will ensure that SLGA has 
authority to carry out its assigned duties and powers as the 
cannabis authority. 
 
Additionally, Mr. Speaker, this bill contains a small number of 
amendments to other pieces of bilingual legislation. These 
amendments are housekeeping in nature and will not have a 
substantive impact on the operation of those Acts. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of 
The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2018. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading on 
cannabis control Act No. 122. Pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? Recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Once again, as I’ve indicated, I want to continue on with our 
discussion around this particular bill. There’s no question that 
the consequential amendment Acts as being proposed by the 
current government as it relates to the cannabis legalization 
process, Mr. Speaker, is going to elicit a lot of discussion across 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now as I indicated to the bill previously, which really talked 
about how they wish to implement this cannabis federal law 
that’s coming forward, Mr. Speaker, I would remind the people 
of Saskatchewan of this: that as the Saskatchewan Party sit on 
their holier-than-thou attitude as it comes to drug use, Mr. 
Speaker, you ask them the questions, what are you doing as a 
party to combat drug use within our communities? What 
resources are you affording, Mr. Speaker, the question I have, 
what resources are you affording to reclaim the families, the 
youth, the children that are being impacted by the illicit drug 
use? 
 
Do not let the cannabis legislation as being proposed by the 
federal government cloud your view of what the Saskatchewan 
Party is not doing. This is the point that I raise on a continual 
basis, Mr. Speaker, and this is exactly how I see, from my 
perspective, of how the conservatives work across the country 
of Canada. They are very, very good at pointing out the other 
party’s faults and weaknesses, Mr. Speaker, but they never take 
a look at themselves. And this is a good example of what I 
would implore the people of Saskatchewan to do, is look at 
what the Saskatchewan Party is not doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I travel throughout the North, there is no services 
whatsoever to help the families struggling with the harder 
drugs, as I made reference to. Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, if there’d 
been efforts designed within this bill, had there been provisions 
identified within this bill that talked about what people in 
northern Saskatchewan and throughout the whole province 
would ask, where are the supports to reclaim the families being 
impacted by illicit drug use? Where are the mental health 
therapists that would be there to help some of these families and 
young people struggling through these addictions? 
 

And it’s not just young people, Mr. Speaker. There are many 
adults that are impacted as well. Where are the community 
initiatives that would be so essential to making sure that 
education and preventing young people from getting caught up 
in the harder drugs, where is that in this particular bill, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
I want to talk about what’s missing in these bills, Mr. Speaker, 
as opposed to what the Saskatchewan Party wanted to do, is 
simply turn around and not do anything and hope nobody 
notices, Mr. Speaker. Well the people of Saskatchewan are 
noticing, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had privy to many, many 
discussions, many, many discussions of older people that are 
just really having a difficult time, struggling with this 
introduction of harder drugs in some of our small northern 
communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are tons of people that are crying out for help. There are 
people out there that need help, Mr. Speaker. There are people 
out there that need intervention. There are people out there that 
need to talk to a counsellor, that need to talk to someone, that 
want to get off these addictions, Mr. Speaker, because it is not 
them. It is not them, Mr. Speaker. They want to go back to who 
they were. And in many times, Mr. Speaker, I see these people 
impacted by this as being very loving, caring, 
community-minded individuals. And once they get caught up in 
these addictions, Mr. Speaker, they become changed people, 
and the whole community changes for the worse. 
 
And I want to know what the Saskatchewan Party government 
is doing to combat that. I want to know exactly what measures 
that they have in place to make sure that they provide leaders, 
leadership, that they provide that lead for the people of 
Saskatchewan to be proud to say we’re dealing with this issue 
in our own Saskatchewan way, Mr. Speaker. And I see none of 
that. I see none of that in any way, shape, or form. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I can tell the people of Saskatchewan that a 
lot of the crime throughout our communities and throughout our 
province is directly linked to the addiction cycle, particularly on 
some of the harder drugs. And I think people are trying to figure 
out how we grapple with that. And I would say to the people 
out there that are having these addiction challenges, that are 
sitting at home and maybe thinking of that, don’t give up hope. 
Don’t give up hope. You are a valuable person that can make 
much contribution to not only yourself but to your family, to 
your people, and to your community. Reach out if you have to, 
and yes, it will be a struggle to go through some of the 
challenges that you have. 
 
And I don’t say it from experience, Mr. Speaker. I’ve seen 
many valuable people get caught up using crystal meth or using 
cocaine, Mr. Speaker, and it really has a negative effect. I want 
to be very, very clear, and I’ve said it many times in this 
Assembly. I don’t ever want to appear to be a hypocrite. So yes, 
from time to time I do have my beer. And, Mr. Speaker, I do 
enjoy having a drink from time to time. But it’s important to 
note, Mr. Speaker, that I don’t need it and it doesn’t interfere 
with my work, I think. But I’m not going to be, I’m not going to 
be judgmental on others that do. I just want to be very perfectly 
clear that I’m not, I’m not . . . I don’t want to take the approach 
that I don’t partake in having a drink every now and then. But, 
Mr. Speaker, I think what’s really important is to recognize that 



March 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3485 

there are people out there struggling with some of the 
addictions I made earlier. 
 
So I’m going to say this very loud and clear. As a result of this 
bill, if the Saskatchewan Party wanted to provide leadership 
instead of just simply pointing at other parties doing the wrong 
thing, then part of that leadership, as we would indicate from 
this side of the Assembly, is that you provide services to 
reclaim as many families as you possibly can, to get them away 
from these addictions and go back to what they were before — 
happy, productive people that can make a significant difference 
to their family and their communities. You’ve got to have that. 
 
And it was with a great amount of interest that I listened to 
President Obama when he spoke about, what he referred to as 
. . . The former President George Bush talked about the war on 
drugs. He spoke about the war on drugs, Mr. Speaker. President 
Obama got up one day and said we also have to have a war on 
reclaiming families addicted to drugs by giving them the myriad 
of services that they require. And I think that was a very solid 
argument that the former President Obama indicated, that we 
have to have a war on recovery of the people affected by these 
addictions. And this is exactly my point. 
 
As we look at the cannabis legalization process, Mr. Speaker, 
the question I would ask is, if you’re getting money from the 
sale of cannabis and if you’re deriving revenues either through 
taxation or whatever means, Mr. Speaker, then we would tell 
the Saskatchewan Party government that you’ve got to have the 
corresponding services at the community level and begin the 
process of rebuilding families, rebuilding our young people and 
those that become addicted to the heavier drugs. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, we’re seeing that many of those people 
are highly valuable people and they just made some wrong 
choices at the wrong time. And everybody is allowed to make a 
mistake, Mr. Speaker. Lord knows, I’ve made many of them. 
But everybody’s allowed to make mistakes, and we all do our 
very best to help them recover. 
 
So I think it’s really important that we speak about that. And 
once again I would tell this to the North, the people that I 
represent, the constituency I come from, is don’t lose hope. 
Don’t lose hope. Fight every inch of the way. Because while 
we’re talking about legalization of cannabis, Mr. Speaker, we 
cannot forget the danger and threat the harder drugs have on our 
many children and families that we have in our lives. We have 
to do all that we can to protect them from these challenges. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can say too as well that during my travels, 
there are many families out there that are wonderful. I see a lot 
of families that are engaging their kids. They’re talking to the 
teenagers within their home and they’re warning them of the 
dangers. So there are many very, very strong families in my 
constituency that really work hard to keep their families drug 
free. They work hard to show their children compassion and 
love and, Mr. Speaker, there are certainly a lot of families out 
there that I want to commend. 
 
So I’ve pointed out, as I’ve said time and time again, I have this 
incredible belief that every single person in this province is of 

significant value to us all. They are of significant value to us all. 
People in our communities . . . And I take that position very 
clearly in my own community, that every single person can 
make a significant, positive contribution to our town because 
they have such abilities. And each of them each have an 
individual gift or they have a special skill that only they can do 
best. And this is what I look for in a lot of people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So once again I would implore the Government of 
Saskatchewan, as we begin to embark on this journey as it 
pertains to the legalization of cannabis, is let us not blind 
ourselves by you simply saying, oh, this federal government’s 
bringing in this legalization of cannabis. Why don’t you do 
something about the harder drug problems we have throughout 
our province instead of just complaining about what the federal 
Liberal government’s going to do? 
 
I think it’s time that they did and, Mr. Speaker, if they don’t, I’ll 
go back to my statement again. Once again the right wing 
governments we have across this country are so eloquent at 
pointing out the weaknesses of other parties when they need to 
take a hard look at themselves. And I would suggest, Mr. 
Speaker, that if they don’t rise to the occasion on this challenge 
today, that once again they’ve failed miserably the future of our 
province, of our families, of our youth, and of our children 
caught up in this incredible challenge of addiction to harder 
drugs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, something has got to be done. Something has got 
to be done, Mr. Speaker, and this is the reason why this debate 
is so important for the people of Saskatchewan, and why today 
I’m so glad that all my colleagues will be rising in their place to 
add their points at a later time. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 122, the cannabis control consequential amendments 
Act, 2018. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn Bill No. 122, the cannabis control consequential 
amendment Act, 2018. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 74 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 74 — The 
Evidence Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative de 2017 sur 
la preuve be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise this afternoon and enter into the debate for Bill No. 74, The 
Evidence Amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, I know a few of my 
colleagues have had the opportunity already to speak to this bill. 



3486 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2018 

I don’t have a lot to add as critic for this bill. I think more of the 
discussion around this bill will happen at committee. 
 
Based on my understanding of the bill, Mr. Speaker, it’s largely 
a housekeeping bill with some language and wording changes 
that essentially modernize The Evidence Act and help to create a 
more easy-to-read piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One thing the bill does do that I want to flag is it takes some 
pieces of the legislation and moves them into the regulations. 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s always, always a concern when you’re in 
opposition when power is moving from legislation to 
regulations because it . . . Although it can, on one side, allow 
for changes that need to happen or decisions that need to be 
made by folks other than these folks around the table to make 
them a little bit more quickly, it does also prevent the level of 
oversight that we have when legislation is tabled as bills in the 
House or when amendments are tabled as bills in the House, 
Mr. Speaker. So we’ll be delving into that a little bit at 
committee. 
 
I’m looking forward to having the opportunity to ask the 
Minister of Justice questions around that as well as some other 
questions with respect to that bill. But as such, I’m going to end 
my discussion about Bill No. 74 at this time. Like I said, more 
appropriate to have more of this discussion in committee, so as 
such I would like to move Bill No. 74, The Evidence 
Amendment Act, to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Douglas Park has 
moved adjournment to committee. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, second reading. 
The question before the Assembly is Bill No. 74 be moved to 
committee. 
 
Okay. The question before the Assembly is a motion by the 
minister that Bill No. 74, The Evidence Amendment Act, 2017 
be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — The Evidence Amendment Act, 2017 will 
be committed to the committee on intergovernmental justice 
and government affairs. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 96 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 96 — The Choice 
of Court Agreements (Hague Convention Implementation) 
Act/Loi sur les accords d’élection de for (mise en œuvre de la 

Convention de La Haye) be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise this afternoon and add my thoughts to Bill No. 96, The 
Choice of Court Agreements (Hague Convention 
Implementation) Act. Mr. Speaker, members opposite seemed 
quite sad that my speech on the bill previous to this was as short 
and succinct as it was. They’ll be disappointed to know that this 
is going to be a pretty short and succinct debate as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I welcome members opposite to join myself and the 
Minister of Justice at committee tomorrow — if this is a bill 
that will be going to committee tomorrow — or tune in. I’m 
sure it will be a very fulsome and exciting debate. And perhaps 
the previous minister of Justice would like to join us as well 
because I do know that he really misses his old file. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill moves to make the Hague Convention of 
June 2005 on the choice of court agreements law; it makes it 
law in Saskatchewan. It’s similar to what we’re seeing happen 
in other jurisdictions. It allows for a better level of I guess 
business ability to . . . business correlation, business 
understanding of how . . . being able to move from jurisdiction 
to jurisdiction with the rules being similar, Mr. Speaker, which 
is why the Hague Convention was created. 
 
In particular it allows so those who are dealing in business 
contracts and international litigation have a greater level of 
certainty, Mr. Speaker. So it makes sense for us to create this 
bill to allow for that level of certainty. I understand that Ontario 
has a similar law that they passed in March 2017. And, Mr. 
Speaker, these rules relate to jurisdiction agreements in civil 
and commercial matters and they recognize a judgment given 
by a court of a contracting state designated in a choice of court 
agreement, Mr. Speaker. And I trust the good folks in The 
Hague know what’s going on with respect to this issue and can 
likely, from what I . . . when I was looking at other jurisdictions 
that had also passed this, that they essentially are mirroring 
what we’re seeing in other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I know I will have the opportunity to ask the officials about 
this bill and about the work that’s been done with respect to the 
bill, Mr. Speaker. I’m looking forward to having the 
opportunity to ask them those questions as well as some 
questions for the minister. So as such, I will at this time move 
Bill No. 96, The Choice of Court Agreements (Hague 
Convention Implementation) Act to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill 96, The Choice of Court Agreements 
(Hague Convention Implementation) Act be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 



March 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3487 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 96, The Choice 
of Court Agreements (Hague Convention Implementation) Act 
be committed to the committee on . . . intergovernmental and 
justice committee. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 
Bill No. 94 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cox that Bill No. 94 — The 
Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings 
(SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise today on Bill No. 94, The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant 
for Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017. We’re 
here today debating this bill, Mr. Speaker, because in this 
government’s last budget a year ago, the Sask Party announced 
that this grant, the SAGES [Saskatchewan advantage grant for 
education savings] grant would be suspended as of January 1st, 
2018. 
 
This program provided a grant that matched 10 per cent of the 
subscriber’s registered education savings plan contributions up 
to a maximum of $250 a year per child, with a lifetime 
maximum of $4,500, Mr. Speaker. And again the government 
announced they would cut the grant and they’d no longer pay it 
on contributions made to RESPs [registered education savings 
plan] after December 31st, 2017. So this Act allows for the 
suspension of that grant program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting to me. I’ve been in this place now for about eight 
and a half years and I was trying to do a little bit of research as 
to when this plan was first implemented. It had been in recent 
memory because I remember the debates about the 
implementation of this program. And, Mr. Speaker, from the 
best of my research here, just looking back through the Internet, 
I believe it came into place, the SAGES grant came into place 
January 1st, 2013. So it saw all of five years, Mr. Speaker, 
supporting . . . I understand there was about 250,000 children at 
that point when it came into being who could benefit from this 
grant. So five years for a government program where there’s a 
bill before the legislature that passed. 
 
This is a government who has had record revenues and offered 
supports at the height of record revenues and, when they had 
record revenues, recognized that education, at least through this 
mechanism, making sure that families could save for 
post-secondary education was important. But I don’t see how it 
is less important in 2018, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know from my own experience, I’m a mother of a child who is 
in university — actually she’s in her second year at McGill — 
and I can tell you that I’ve been saving for her education. Her 
dad and I have been saving for her education since the time she 

was an infant, just putting a little bit of money away every 
month so it hurt a little bit less over the long haul. But I can tell 
you that, even with that diligent savings and even with the 
support of this grant, that it’s still a challenge to pay for tuition. 
 
I know this is a government, Mr. Speaker, that has made it 
harder for families to save for their kids’ education, but at the 
same time they’ve cut over 5 per cent from post-secondary 
institutions which now means those post-secondary institutions, 
like the University of Saskatchewan or the University of Regina 
or polytechnic, have to raise tuition or cut services and 
sometimes a combination of both, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:15] 
 
So paying thousands and thousands of dollars every year for 
tuition and no longer having access to this grant, I think hurts 
lower to middle-income families a great deal, Mr. Speaker. I 
just going online here to . . . I’m going to look at the Canadian 
Scholarship Trust Plan website, Mr. Speaker, where there was a 
picture of the then minister of Advanced Education; who is the 
Attorney General, current Attorney General, with great fanfare 
when this program was announced. But some of the quotes by 
families who were pleased with this grant, I’d like to quote 
them. These are listed on a public website. It says, “I personally 
wanted a post-secondary education and went into debt to do it. I 
don’t want the same struggles for my . . . [three-year-old] 
boys.” So that was Lydia Cossette from Moose Jaw who said 
that when this grant was announced, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another individual says, “RESPs and incentives weren’t 
available when I was a child so I wanted to give my son a future 
full of opportunity without the stress and worry of how he will 
pay for it [now].” That from Sarah Nunweiler in Saskatoon. 
Another one: “With the expensive cost of education, I don’t 
want to be struggling to figure out when I’ll be able to retire.” 
Aaron Exner from Prince Albert. And one more, Mr. Speaker: 
“Saving for my son is truly the most important thing my money 
goes to. He deserves the opportunities I did not have.” Chelsea 
Spence from North Battleford. 
 
So I can tell you when that program was announced in 2012 and 
implemented in 2013, that those sentiments that those families 
expressed are no different today than they were back then, Mr. 
Speaker. I can tell you too that looking at the U of S [University 
of Saskatchewan] . . . And I had the opportunity, actually, I was 
absent from the House two days last week, Mr. Speaker, both 
days to be on campus. One for a health innovation policy 
conference put on by med students, Mr. Speaker, and it was 
amazing. It wasn’t med students — or students in the health 
sciences, pardon me — participating but they had arranged it. 
And certainly there were many, many people in those fields 
who were there, and it was an impressive bunch. 
 
And then on Thursday of last week, I had the opportunity to 
judge the 3 Minute Thesis competition at the U of S, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s where students had three minutes to 
condense some of their master’s or graduate school work into 
three minutes. And I have to say, it was an incredibly 
impressive bunch of students, Mr. Speaker, talking about 
everything from identifying and trying to prevent mental illness 
in pregnancy, connecting it back to conditions that the mother, 
the pregnant woman, experienced during pregnancy, Mr. 



3488 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2018 

Speaker, and how that had long-term impacts on potential 
mental health. 
 
There was a young woman, Mr. Speaker, who actually has 
created a system through which . . . This was above my pay 
grade, I have to admit. She explained it very well in three 
minutes though, but the gist of it is early detection of cancer. 
There was another woman talking about . . . And this really 
stuck out for me. It was a woman talking about our perceptions 
of Iranian women, or women who live in Muslim countries and 
how we have perceptions here in the West. But she talked about 
Canadians aren’t just all about maple syrup and hockey. So she 
made some great parallels between those kinds of things that 
people from other parts of the world think about us and 
impressions of women in Iran. 
 
It was amazing actually to hear all the wonderful research going 
on, and it really drove home the point for me that supporting 
our secondary institutions and supporting our students to have 
the opportunity to access those institutions is really important. 
And this is something that this government is not doing, Mr. 
Speaker, not doing well. And this cut to this grant, the 
Saskatchewan advantage grant for education savings, will have 
a real impact on the amount of money families can put away for 
their kids to ensure the opportunity that they can go to 
post-secondary institutions, whether it’s college or university or 
whatever they choose, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this is again a government who’s made it harder for families 
to save for their kids’ educations while cutting university 
funding and forcing those post-secondary institutions to raise 
tuition or cut services and actually sometimes both, Mr. 
Speaker. You talk to anybody who works and teaches at the 
universities or polytechnic and you can see the pressure on 
those classrooms, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that our post-secondary education critic, when this bill 
finally makes it to committee, will have some questions for the 
minister. I think one of them . . . I know in the last budget this 
was supposedly temporarily suspended, but I suspect if we’ve 
got a bill that’s before us, that puts that grant on hold. I have a 
hard time believing that it’ll come back, Mr. Speaker. So 
perhaps that’s a question for the minister responsible in 
committee, to get a sense of when and if the SAGES grant will 
ever be reimplemented, Mr. Speaker, because it does have a 
positive impact on kids and families being able to afford school. 
 
I know from my own experience, my parents . . . I’m the 
youngest of seven kids and there wasn’t a lot of money left to 
save for education. And I actually just probably within the last 
five years paid off my student loans. I had gone back to school 
in my 30s as a single parent so it took a while, but I know one 
of my commitments to my two kids was to make sure that they 
had the money and the opportunity to try to get through that 
first degree or that first education opportunity without being 
burdened by too much debt, Mr. Speaker. And a cut to this 
grant makes it harder for families to be able to support their 
kids. 
 
So I look forward to our critic’s questions in committee, but 
with that for now I move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 94, The 
Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings 
(SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017. 

The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 94, The Saskatchewan 
Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment 
Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

Bill No. 95 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 95 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 
No. 95. Of course this bill will repeal and make some 
amendments to certain statutes. But before I get on and . . . The 
one of the areas that it’s going to repeal, and I think it’s 
interesting over time . . . I think back home to the year, you 
know, this certain bill or this certain, I guess, piece of 
legislation or even the naming of it, you know, the Enterprise 
Saskatchewan. When I think about that, back home, some of the 
challenges in economics that people were feeling, and I think of 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
But in many of the communities, they had certain . . . Economic 
development corporations did some great work. But the 
government came along. We had a new government in 2007, 
you know, decided to come along. And sometimes in some of 
our communities people didn’t truly understand it, and I think 
about maybe my grandkids, being the age they were, they were 
wondering what were all the balloons about and the parades. 
And there was all these things happening and this was going to 
save Saskatchewan and, you know, it was going to be I guess 
truly one of the greatest things of our province. 
 
And lo and behold, as it rolled out . . . And I’ve watched. 
There’s been people appointed to the board members, and there 
was local regions that had their development corporations. And 
it was changed and those were, you know, no longer. And there 
was this new Enterprise Saskatchewan. And like I said, it was 
like a big parade and people thought . . . They were wondering 
what it was all about. And at the end of the day, here we are 
today. Not long ago, it hasn’t been there very long and the 
government is now repealing it, saying it didn’t work. It 
miserable failed. 
 
Now if that’s the case and they’re repealing it, there was sure a 
lot of, like I say, I mean . . . I look at the different areas where, 
you know, we heard a lot of, I guess, cheers, hurrahs. There was 
cheerleaders everywhere. And it was a certain bill that was 
going to just change from, the private sector was going to take 
over and government would no longer . . . You had the 
enterprise regions that would do it, and the government 
wouldn’t pick winners and losers. I remember hearing the 
stories, I mean it was unreal at the time. Time and time again 
we heard in this House, and many members on both sides 
would’ve talked about it. If it was a thing that was supposed to 
do some great thing with economic development and create jobs 
for the North and community, we were all for that. 



March 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3489 

And I know many people that sat on boards, maybe worked for 
those organizations that represented the government’s so-called 
vision of what it wanted to see in economic development and 
opportunity. There were people who volunteered. There were 
people who worked. There were people who truly committed to 
that and served honourably and worked hard to try to get 
economics going in our regions. And I think about it. Here was 
a government . . . And I watched some of those people lose 
their jobs. And as, you know, the wind-down, whatever you 
want to call it — it was cancelled — and the changes that went 
on, it impacted a lot of the communities. 
 
And today people are looking at the government and the 
government has a role with economics. And what is the role of 
the government? To work with industry, to work with 
communities to have that development going on. We’re hearing 
it right now, and there’s many struggles in areas. And I think 
about . . . There’s areas like tourism. There’s many areas that 
people look at government, saying how can you . . . Not dictate, 
you don’t want to be the dictator. That’s not what people want. 
How can you be a true partner in the economy and local regions 
to help regions that are suffering? 
 
And I’ll tell you, in this province with the taxes, the PST 
[provincial sales tax] that they have put on many communities, 
and local communities that have to raise taxes on their 
residents, with property taxes, because of the lack of support 
that they’re getting from the Sask Party government and the 
government of the day. And I think as things reveal itself, it’s 
probably going to get worse, with the way we’re hearing some 
of the reports, some of my colleagues in question period talking 
about. 
 
So if at the end of the day this was supposed to be something 
that the Sask Party government and at the time the premier, this 
was going to make his government and the province shine. 
Really. You know, they can sit there and see, when you’re 
repealing it, I guess really how good . . . As I referred to people 
leaving, having to lose their jobs, moving out of their 
communities, and I’ve seen some of that happen, the change 
that happened when these enterprise regions were taken away. 
 
But in this legislation there are many areas that they might 
make little changes, amendments, but that was the one area 
where I wanted to truly talk about, was the enterprise region 
and what it was, and how people, people were excited. I know 
back home, I know there’s individuals who are entrepreneurs, 
hard-working. There was First Nations, Métis leaders that were 
a part of that. And it was a board that did some great work, and 
they had done great work. They were hoping this would have 
helped to, you know, generate economics in our regions. And 
man, were they disappointed as they seen the government 
walking away and phasing out, but giving no other supports and 
changing programs. And it has impacted many regions. And, 
you know, I don’t have all the stats. I just . . . 
 
You know, when I think back about the areas that I represent, 
there was some excitement at one time, but the parade’s over. 
You know, that’s done. You know, for whatever reason, it’s just 
not, it’s not going to be anymore. And this government has to 
take ownership of that. The way they really played this up like 
it was just going to save the province and save Saskatchewan, 
save regions and local communities with economic 

development — this government has failed, failed, failed many 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
And at the end of the day, I guess, you know, you had a 
booming economy. We had many things happening in this 
province. And this government is going to have to pay the price 
for that, and we’ve said that. And I know back and forth we’ll 
heckle and stuff, but they will pay the price. And when people 
see everything, you know, we’re paying more and more. 
Saskatchewan residents are paying more, and asked every time 
whether it’s municipal taxes going up because of the 
government failing.  
 
There’s only one place where you’re going to get taxes, and 
that’s our working men and women of this province. And many 
of our residents in this province, whether they’re seniors, the 
cost of living is just it’s unbelievable. Some of them are finding 
hard to bear the cost. And whether it’s drugs, food, rent — what 
do you do, pay your utilities? We’re hearing it all the time. And 
today it’s the struggles And I think about question period, 
referring to this bill and some of the challenges that many of 
our residents are facing. 
 
So having said that, at this point, you know, the parade’s over. 
We know that the government of the day will be held 
accountable. And the new Premier and his government will be 
taking stands by the leadership and local leaders. Because the 
local leaders have done a great job, and they will continue to do 
a good job. But I know they’re going to be pushing pressure on 
the government. And it’s going to be bills like that are repealing 
like this that people back home are looking at. 
 
[15:30] 
 
So we’ll see where this government’s going to go to help 
economic because right now many of our regions need the 
employment. And we’ll see what partnership this government 
will say — he always talks about wanting to be partners — 
we’ll see just how they’re going to be that good partner, and 
we’ll see how that works for many Saskatchewan residents. At 
this time, Mr. Speaker, I have no further comments, so I’m 
prepared to adjourn on Bill No. 95. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 95, The Miscellaneous Statutes 
Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017. Is it . . . [inaudible] . . . adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

Bill No 97 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 97 — The 
Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter into adjourned debates on Bill No. 97, The Arbitration 
(Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017. 



3490 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2018 

Although it might sound like a very informal way to settle 
disputes, the rules surrounding arbitration are still quite 
formalized. So according to section 13 of The Arbitration Act, 
1992, a party may not revoke the appointment of an arbitrator, 
but arbitration also allows for mediation and other techniques. 
So section 36(1) says, “The members of an arbitral tribunal 
may, if the parties consent, use mediation, conciliation or 
similar techniques during the arbitration to encourage 
settlement of the matters in dispute.” 
 
So this provides an option for settling the dispute outside of 
court if people can come to an agreement to using these 
methods. As someone who has Canadian Forces training in 
alternate dispute resolution, I understand some of these 
dynamics and some of the complications that can emerge when 
we’re talking about conflict resolution, Mr. Speaker, and I 
appreciate the opportunity this presents for families where 
emotions often run quite high in these situations. And many of 
these situations lead to costly legal battles and are quite divisive 
for families that are involved. 
 
And in light of some of the 2016 Canada census numbers, I 
think the prevalence of these disputes, or opportunities for these 
disputes to exist is evident. So I want to share some of the 
numbers that I found: 12,905 stepfamilies existed in 2016; 
2,890 children were living with grandparents; 47,215 children 
were living with a lone parent. So these numbers offer us a 
glimpse into some of the separation and divorce rates in the 
country, which certainly some of these situations would be 
covered in this bill where these separations do not occur 
amicably. 
 
So this bill sets out a definition for a family arbitrator as “. . . a 
person who is recognized by the minister as meeting the 
requirements prescribed in the regulations for family 
arbitrators.” It also adds a definition for family dispute, 
meaning: 
 

. . . a dispute between the parties respecting a matter to 
which one of the following applies: 
 

(a) Part II or IV of The Children’s Law Act, 1997, other 
than a hearing pursuant to section 12 of that Act; 
 
(b) The Family Maintenance Act, 1997; 
 
(c) The Family Property Act; [or] 
 
(d) the Divorce Act (Canada). 

 
There are also a couple of housekeeping definitions to “court” 
and “minister” that have been added, and there’s no change to 
the definitions of “arbitrator” or “arbitration agreement”. When 
we refer to an arbitration agreement, we are still referring to, 
and I quote, “. . . an agreement by which two or more persons 
agree to submit a matter in dispute to arbitration.” 
 
Some of these family disputes might include custody of 
children, child support and alimony which is referred to as 
maintenance — which I didn’t know prior to this because I do 
not have a legal background, but I have taken some time to 
learn about it, Mr. Speaker — family property disputes, and 
matters that relate to divorce. So this Act is proposing to change 

all of those other Acts as they relate to family arbitration, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Section 61 is also added to provide for arbitration agreements in 
family law disputes, provided the dispute exists, that no party 
took advantage of another party’s vulnerabilities or ignorance; 
if either party did not understand the nature of the consequences 
of the agreement; other circumstances that would cause the 
contract to be voidable under common law; or if the arbitration 
of the family dispute was not conducted by a family arbitrator. 
 
There are also some provisions added in section 58.1 where the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council may make regulations, quoting 
subsection (b): 
 

with respect to family arbitrators, prescribing the training, 
experience and other qualifications a person must have, 
and the requirements a person must meet, to be qualified as 
a family arbitrator. 

 
So when the minister gave his second reading speech on this 
bill, he spoke about the fact that arbitration may be a viable 
option for some family disputes but that current legislation does 
not expressly allow for arbitration for these family disputes. He 
argues that proposed changes will establish a framework for 
arbitration of family disputes to fill this void. He then argues: 
 

The bill defines family arbitrator to ensure that any 
individual acting as a arbitrator in a family dispute has 
experience not just with arbitration but specifically in the 
family law realm. 

 
Now I’ve pored through this bill and the explanatory notes, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m yet to find the details the minister is referring 
to here. It’s entirely possible that I missed it somewhere. But all 
I’ve found in relation to the requirements or qualifications set 
out for a family arbitrator is in section 58.1 which I identified 
earlier. So unless I’m missing something, this legislation does 
not set out the exact qualifications that the minister is 
identifying So that’s definitely going to be a question for us in 
committee: what will these requirements or qualifications look 
like for someone to be qualified as a family arbitrator? 
 
One of the big concerns that we have here, Mr. Speaker, is in 
regards to access to family arbitrators. And if these 
qualifications . . . They’re going to be quite important here. If 
the qualifications to be a family arbitrator are going to include 
experience in family law in particular, this certainly raises 
access concerns, particularly in rural and remote communities 
where they may not have access to a family arbitrator with a 
background in family law. So those are definitely some 
concerns that we’re interested in raising. 
 
As my colleague from Athabasca identified, families in dispute 
situations are often going through a lot of pressure and stress. 
Providing support to these folks through arbitration could be an 
effective and cost-saving measure and may be quite beneficial 
to families in Saskatchewan. Definitely we see some possible 
benefits if we can successfully use arbitration for family 
disputes. You know, we’re talking about using alternative 
measures that are outside of the courthouse, saving some legal 
fees. It might have a more positive impact on all the parties 
involved, including in particular children who often get quite 



March 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3491 

involved in these situations, and might provide an opportunity 
to focus on some of the common values that exist within the 
family unit and to work together where current legislation, as 
the minister pointed out, doesn’t expressly permit arbitration 
right now in family disputes. 
 
There’s also some other benefits to the fact that this is a 
voluntary process that we’re talking about. People aren’t there 
unless they want to be, Mr. Speaker. It can promote 
communication between the different parties. It can make 
relationships a little bit less oppositional and a little bit less 
hostile. And it definitely can cost less in terms of the time and 
the money compared to having families going to court and not 
dealing with the delays of court, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As some of my other colleagues have pointed out, there’s a 
trend to divert family disputes to arbitration. This could 
definitely be a more beneficial process for those involved. It 
obviously isn’t going to work for all families in all disputes that 
exist, but it can be a useful tool in the tool box to be able to help 
families resolve some of these disputes a little bit more 
efficiently and in a more cost-effective manner. 
 
But we will certainly have questions around access, particularly 
rural and remote access, that are related to those regulations, 
Mr. Speaker, and what those regulations look like. We haven’t 
seen any clear information about what those regulations are as 
of yet and also what this process is actually going to look like 
for folks. So we’ll have those questions about access and 
process for committee. I know my colleagues will have more to 
say about this particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, but 
with that I would move to adjourn debate on Bill 97, the 
arbitration amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Fairview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 97, The Arbitration 
(Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 98 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 98 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) 
Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative diverse (résolution des 
conflits familiaux) de 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise today and enter into the debate on Bill No. 98, 
An Act to amend certain Statutes respecting Family Dispute 
Resolution. And I think this is a very timely one. And I 
appreciated the comments that were made by my colleague, just 
before I stood, about the issues around families in crisis. 
 
And the numbers are actually quite staggering and quite 
amazing when you think of the divorces that are happening and 

the outcome of that, and the fact that there are thousands of 
children who are put at risk because of families not being able 
to be whole, and in fact they become in dispute. And I think that 
we see it particularly in Saskatchewan, the alarming statistics 
around domestic violence, and particularly here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I know that in many ways this legislation is good. We have 
some questions about it. But we do also have some concerns 
because, while we have on our side of the House brought 
forward — I think twice or three times — the critic for Justice 
has brought forward ideas about how we could be very helpful 
in this area, particularly around domestic violence, and while 
the government has taken up some of those pieces, I can’t help 
but think that at the end of the day, whether it be having 
mediation, arbitration, or if it’s going to court, all of that costs 
families and particularly the victims. 
 
And because this government did not choose to embrace the 
idea of having days where the victims could be away from work 
and yet receive their pay, or sometimes in fact not actually 
receive their pay, but in fact they would have their job and how 
important that is, because these things, no matter how you cut 
it, are not free. And while lawyers are expensive — and we get 
that — there are still other expenses that are involved. 
 
And so it’s important that we recognize that, and this is not the 
end of the discussions we have around this, and that in fact the 
key thing is access to justice, access to services, and particularly 
those who are fleeing domestic violence have access to that, and 
while this, it talks about family mediators and dispute resolution 
and it defines what family arbitrator and family mediator 
means. 
 
[15:45] 
 
We do have a lot of work ahead of us, and we look forward to 
hearing even more from this government in terms of the actual 
crisis of domestic violence and the fact that in Saskatchewan we 
have the highest rates in Canada. And this is something that 
impacts us all, impacts our economy, and when we have people 
who are suffering and suffering at work, suffering at home, 
suffering alone, and then we have the extremely unfortunate 
circumstance where we have children actually being victimized 
as well. And so I appreciate that the numbers are staggering and 
the fact that we can’t just set that aside. 
 
And so I want to go through some of the comments. It’s always 
helpful, particularly for people who are at home right now who 
are tuning in and picking up the debates, the adjourned debates, 
and wanting to know a little bit more about what are we, what’s 
the debate at hand. And of course the minister gets up. And it’s 
important when the minister does get up because he has 
prepared remarks. These remarks can be used later, whether in a 
court case or some process where they’re really wanting to 
understand the intention of the legislation. And so he talks 
about the Acts that are amended: The Children’s Law Act, 1997, 
The Family Maintenance Act, The Family Property Act, The 
Queen’s Bench Act, and so to recognize and promote early 
dispute resolution. 
 
And I think that if we can, that is a worthy and lofty goal, that if 
we can get to that stage earlier and, as my colleague, actually, 



3492 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2018 

my colleague from Riversdale, she spoke on this issue as well, 
talks about if you have skilled family mediators and arbitrators 
that in fact you can resolve these issues in a much more 
positive, if that can be the description, but in an effective way 
without involving a judge who doesn’t really have a handle on 
the whole thing. And we can be quite tied up in some of the 
legalese even though, as my member from Fairview talked 
about, arbitration is a process and so is mediation, and you want 
to be in a safe space when you’re doing this. There is absolutely 
training and it’s not just a random get-together in a room and 
we’ll work it out. It’s much more than that. And so these are 
important things. 
 
But it is good to see us move away from the old style of the 
courts in the day of when we used to threaten, “I’ll see you in 
court” or “I’ll take you to court.” But this is a way of positively 
resolving things because at the end of the day, as we’ve talked 
about, that there are many, many people involved in this and 
probably most of all, the children that we want to make sure 
remain healthy and unharmed through these disputes processes. 
 
So a couple of questions I do have for the, probably will have. 
When I look through this, the minister does not refer, I don’t 
believe, to any kind of consultation. And I hope this has all 
been dealt with and there has been some forms of consultation, 
whether with the legal profession that has been experiencing 
this, other non-governmental organizations, NGOs that deal 
with family support that feel this is a good way to go. 
 
I think it’s important that we do have those fresh eyes that take 
a look at this kind of legislation and that we can make sure there 
are no unintended consequences, that in fact we’re going to hit 
the mark. And while we know legislation is an imperfect tool, 
we don’t want to be using a jackhammer when a craft hammer 
can be much more effective. And so I think this is important 
and I think that consultation is huge so there’s no unintended 
consequences. We want to make sure that when we have this 
kind of suite of tools for families that are in crisis that in fact it 
can be used well. 
 
The other — and I’ll come back to this at the end — we’re 
heading into the budget time right now and we can have this 
kind of call for more mediators, more arbitrators, but are there 
resources for families to access? Will we be seeing an increase 
in the Justice budget to help with this kind of legislation? So 
that in fact when people see that, hey, we’ve passed this 
legislation that is really calling for more tools for families, that 
in fact they can access them in a timely and effective way; so 
that there’s not huge waiting lists or, as the member before us 
talked about, it only happens in the big cities or you have to 
travel to the big cities to do this. Because we know more and 
more that this is a challenging thing to do. 
 
And of course with this government killing STC — and I don’t 
want to go down that discussion about STC; I could be here all 
night. But again in terms of families getting access and services, 
quite often they would access STC. It would be a safe way. And 
we know that is actually the truth, that is not something that . . . 
We’ve heard that and we’ve heard that from the legal 
profession, where families would have to come into the cities 
and they couldn’t access services because they couldn’t get into 
town to get the services. 
 

And so our province, Mr. Speaker, as you know and as certainly 
the folks on the other side know and we certainly know, that we 
need, when we provide services, there has to be equal access 
right across the province so that everyone can utilize the 
services. We know families in crisis, particularly in the smaller 
communities, rural communities, may be feeling more alone 
than ever because they are isolated. And this is something that 
we need to make sure, that the actual resources are available 
and that they’re affordable. I don’t know what the costs of this 
would be. And again the minister alluded to the fact that they’d 
be more accessible, but I’m not sure if that’s the case. 
 
But I want to go back for the folks who are at home here, just to 
review some of the things that the minister talked about. He 
talked about the Government of Saskatchewan being:  
 

. . . committed to encouraging early dispute resolution 
methods in family law matters for the timely and 
cost-effective resolutions of family disputes. In some cases 
an out-of-court or early dispute mechanism may be more 
appropriate . . .  
 

And so that’s fair enough. They can achieve a fast result, be 
more cost effective, and have less of an emotional toll on 
parties. And I think that’s really true, especially that emotional 
toll. As we know, when families are forced to go to court and it 
seems the court of last resort or a tool of last resort, that the 
ruling can have quite a huge emotional effect in terms of . . . 
And then at the end of the day, you have to make sure it’s 
enforceable. And so if it can be done earlier and people buy into 
it, then that’s a good thing. 
 
And so there is an approved dispute resolution process before 
proceeding with a court process, and people would be 
encouraged to do that. But “Unlike in regular civil actions 
before the court, parties to a family law dispute are not required 
to participate in mandatory mediation.” So they don’t have to 
do that. “This may include mediation, but could also be 
satisfied by using the services of a collaborative lawyer, having 
attempted arbitration, or other forms of out-of-court 
resolution . . .” 
 
And they will take some exceptions, and this is very important. 
The circumstances in which an application to the court, where 
any person may be denied, is where there is a history of 
violence, the child has been abducted, or a restraining order is 
in place, a party may seek an exception. So this is an important 
part. And it’ll be interesting to see how successful this is in 
making sure that in fact where there is a history of domestic 
violence or a child’s been abducted or a restraining order, that 
in fact that they cannot go through or do not have to go through 
early dispute resolution because in fact the damage has been 
done. The violence has occurred. The emotional toll has 
happened. And so the point is there has to be some finality. 
 
There has to be a sense that justice has been served, that in fact 
the victims have had access and they’ve been heard by the court 
of the land to make sure that there will be a sense of justice. 
And not that we’re looking for vengeance or anything but, I 
mean, a sense of due process that in fact that this is a serious, 
serious matter and the courts of the land will take that seriously 
and do not dismiss out of hand domestic violence as something 
light and not to be considered in these kind of things. And so 



March 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3493 

that is a good thing. That’s very, very important. I think that we 
can all agree that there should not be a chance for these folks to 
get out of their responsibility. 
 
So “Where parties choose mediation, they will be required to 
use the services of a family mediator.” And of course “The 
qualifications . . . will be set out in the regulations.” And there 
we won’t know until we actually see what those regulations are. 
And how quickly will this come into force? Now the bill before 
us talks about when it comes into force on proclamation, but the 
challenge will be, really, what about the regulations? This all 
hinges on having family mediators, having family mediators 
who are properly trained, family mediators who have applied 
and been approved through the regulations. And are the 
regulations ready to go? 
 
So these are some of the questions that we’ll have in the 
committee. They’ll “. . . have special training in family law and 
have enhanced knowledge of the conflicts that may arise in and 
the intricacies of family law disputes.” So that’s very important. 
 
The Children’s Law Act, 1997 and The Family Maintenance 
Act, 1997, it talks about a family mediator with the additional 
training when it relates to those two pieces of legislation — 
very important. 
 
So then he talks about “Amendments to The Children’s Law Act 
will also include revisions respecting parenting coordinators” 
and how they “. . . can offer parties in high conflict resolutions 
an avenue for resolution that does not involve more court 
applications.” Now again, “Parenting coordinators are trained 
. . . who can help parties navigate the interpretation of an 
existing order or agreement such as pickup times and locations 
. . .” Now I’m not familiar what the history of parent 
coordinators are. And the minister goes on, talks about: 
 

Parenting coordinators will not create or change parenting 
arrangements, the division of parenting responsibilities, 
custody, or access to the child. The bill will set out when 
the services of a parenting coordinator may be used, the 
types of determinations the parenting coordinator may 
make, and the minimum training and practice criteria . . . 
will need to qualify as a parenting coordinator. 

 
Now it will be interesting to see. You know, this is fairly new to 
me. Like, maybe a parenting coordinator is well established, but 
I don’t know anyone who actually is one, what their training is, 
what their pay is. Is it a full-time type of work? How many of 
them are around the province? This will be interesting to see 
what the minister has in mind. 
 
And as always, this is a very good thing for us, when we get 
into committee that we can be asking these kind of questions 
because it’s so critically important that . . . I think in terms of 
family law or domestic law or relationships that, as I said, we 
have such a shameful record here in Saskatchewan around 
domestic violence. And we need to do much more and we need 
to do much more quickly. And we think of the tragic situations 
when things go terribly wrong, deaths that have been caused 
through domestic violence, that this is not a small thing, that in 
fact this is a very, very important piece of legislation before us. 
 
[16:00] 

So as some of us have indicated, we’re very keen about making 
sure that we can get to work on this and see that this can have 
effects and has a positive effect in our families right across this 
province. The question though before us, I mean really will be 
two or three. One, when does it come into effect? How quickly 
can we get these people . . . You know, I’m familiar with 
mediators, arbitrators. But parenting coordinators, I’ve not been 
very familiar with. And maybe that’s a well-established field, 
but I know that this is something that, if they can be helpful 
then that would be a fantastic thing. 
 
But at the end of the day too, Mr. Speaker, as I said at the 
beginning of my remarks, the key will be the resources that will 
ensure that there are these resources. Who pays for the 
parenting coordinator? Is that something that will be billed out 
to people or is it a public service that we can see who pays for 
these services? And will that be handled in an effective way? 
 
We can look at financial supports that we often don’t see being 
paid. And of course in many ways we have a pretty effective 
unit within Justice, I believe, who looks after collecting 
delinquent family supports. But that’s not an easy thing to do 
because some of the — I don’t know what you call them — 
deadbeat dads or whatever, who try to avoid the payments, go 
to quite some lengths to avoid their responsibility. And so this 
is something that we have, and as the minister referred to them 
as a strong suite of tools that can be used for family disputes. 
That’s, as I said right at the very beginning, a very worthwhile 
goal that we can all support. But let’s not make it something 
that somebody reads about on a website and then phones up for 
access to it and finds out that in fact it hasn’t been supported, 
that in fact there is not the resources there for it. 
 
And I really do worry in a lot of ways that many of these things 
that this government has done have been hollow tools because 
they are just not there for the time. And I think about the 
different initiatives they have come forward with, and we’ve 
had to call them out on that in question period and others 
because they’re just not there. And families are expecting more 
supports because the government has taken some time to 
promote it. And I know this minister is deeply, deeply 
committed to family law and justice for those who are in 
vulnerable circumstances. But as we had heard from the 
member from Fairview, the sheer numbers of children and 
families that are in dispute is a significant challenge here in this 
province. And are they willing to step up to the plate and 
deliver not only the legislation but the dollars and the resources 
and the people to make sure that it will be done and will be 
done in a completely effective manner. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I know there’s lots of legislation before us 
this afternoon and we want to get to that. But as I said, when we 
get to Bill No. 98, An Act to amend certain Statutes respecting 
Family Dispute Resolution, the minister needs to come to the 
committee well prepared with answers about what the 
government is doing around family disputes. But the ugly, ugly 
way it manifests, from the extreme of violence, the tragedies 
we’ve seen, deaths related to family violence, what are we 
doing about that? What can we do more about that? Have they 
priorized these things or will there be resources in place? 
 
This is not a small thing. People . . . And we know this from our 
conversations, and our own critic for Justice has been working 



3494 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2018 

many months on this, on family and interpersonal violence, 
domestic violence. And I’ve been happy, been happy to support 
her in that work. And whether it’s been housing, making sure 
people fleeing domestic violence have the ability to leave and 
break leases that otherwise might be punishing in terms of the 
amount that is owed . . . And the government picked that up and 
ran with that. That was good. And so we see them taking up 
some of the pieces, but we did not see them take up the piece 
around being able to have days in their workplace to the extent 
they needed to be. 
 
And as I said, in Saskatchewan this is a very, very big issue and 
one that is not just in passing interest, but I think should be one 
of, if not the biggest challenges that the Minister of Justice sees 
on his plate and really wants to step up and do the right thing. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I know many of us will want to 
speak and we’ll have questions in committee. But I think people 
will want to get on record their thoughts on Bill No. 98, An Act 
to amend certain Statutes respecting Family Dispute 
Resolution. I move that we adjourn debates on this bill this 
evening. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Centre has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 98, The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 99 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 99 — The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2)/Loi modificative 
no 2 de 2017 sur l’interprétation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 
No. 99, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017, getting into 
the Act itself and what it’s going to, I guess, try to do and what 
the government is trying to accomplish. 
 
When we look at Bill 40, and Bill 40 in itself, government said 
. . . and at the time, you know, I believe it was the premier at the 
time said in order for this to wind down, sell off, get rid of, 
whatever it was they were going to be done to STC, they 
needed this Act to do certain things. And the government went 
ahead with this Act, even though we’ve had many people from 
across the province were very concerned with where the 
government was going. And they talked about privatization, and 
that was clear. People were very concerned about privatization. 
 
But before I get into some of the details and what they’re 
referring to, I think it’s important to talk about STC, and to 
many great workers that were out at STC and many of the 
depots and the communities that, you know, took care of 
customers, bought tickets, parcel express that came through 
STC to many of the communities. And I think about that and 
some of those community members back in my communities 

that I represent, but not only in the communities I represent, in 
many of the rural communities, the isolated communities in the 
North, but also in the urban centres, and I think it’s somewhere 
around, if a person . . . I think it’s about 90 per cent of 
Saskatchewan residents, if they chose and made the decision 
that they wanted to have access to STC, they could have done 
that or they could have used it for parcel express. They could 
have done that. They had access to that service. 
 
So when we see how a great service it was and the great work 
that it did, and at the end of the day you’ve heard from different 
leaders, you’ve heard from many resident seniors, those most 
vulnerable when it comes to people with disabilities and having 
access to STC, those with medical problems that rode STC, and 
I think there’s many of them. I’ve had people saying, cancer 
patients. I know that there was some, you know, back home that 
that’s how they travelled. They travelled to Saskatoon on STC 
and used that service. 
 
So it was a great service that this province had an opportunity, 
and to see the government do what it’d done with legislation 
that it brought forward, and the legislation that was brought 
forward gave them the opportunity . . . and whether it’s sell-off, 
wind-down, everybody will have, you know, their own 
interpretation as far as what they’re saying. Government will 
have their version of what they want the public to see. But when 
you go talk to the public and you’re sitting around people’s 
tables and you see, man, I hear still to this day — and you’ll see 
on social media — the people that still miss STC and are saying 
they’re so upset and angry with the government, the way the 
government handled STC and the sell-off of one of our Crowns, 
our most precious Crowns that the government decided to sell 
off. 
 
So people are concerned, and they were concerned when Bill 40 
came forward. And the governments even talk about 
privatizing, and I know that, you know, I’ve heard from the 
government’s side many times back and forth which . . . you 
know, heckle back and forth. I understand that, that, you know, 
fearmongering and all the other stuff. Well I think the people 
got to see exactly what was going on. And I think, you know, 
the government heard, and the Premier I believe made 
comments about that — he’s heard the people, and he was 
going to repeal Bill 40. 
 
Well along comes Bill 40 that gave the government at the time 
the opportunity to wind down, sell off the assets of STC. And 
we see today on the auction block, and we see exactly the 
damage and we’re feeling the damage. And the government at 
the time said the private sector would take over. Oh, don’t 
worry about it, you know. We don’t need to have this subsidy; 
the private sector will take over. And let me reassure the 
government of the day, the private sector has not taken over. 
And you have left many people in our province — in rural and 
north, urban — very, very unhappy with you for the way you’ve 
handled that. And there is no service being provided to them. 
There is no private sector taking over providing for those that 
really need to travel. 
 
So having said that, this government of the day will have to 
wear that. And I hope come election time, and at any time that 
people respond to this government and show them the way they 
were treated, the way you treated the most vulnerable . . . And 



March 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3495 

we’ve seen that. 
 
So having said that, Mr. Speaker, having said the way that they 
carried on STC . . . And many people wrote them letters, and I 
know that. And I even know that, you know, some of the 
leadership candidates would’ve got correspondence on, you 
know, some of them would’ve got people saying, concern. So 
you know, we never heard what their stand would be. Would 
they bring back STC should, you know, a new premier be in? 
 
So we’re still waiting to see what the new Premier will do. 
Maybe he will say it’s time to revisit it and do something, and I 
hope he would. I know on this side of the House, we know from 
the good people of our province are saying, they’re demanding 
something be done. What exactly that will look like, we’ll have 
to see at the end of the day. But I know that the people need a 
service to provide them, especially when the private sector did 
not take over and isn’t taking over for whatever reason. 
 
And I know the bigger centres, Regina, Saskatoon, I don’t know 
exactly, but I know it’s in the millions of subsidies that they get. 
Yet this government didn’t want to subsidize the whole 
province, this whole province . . . STC would’ve been 12 to $10 
million. They fought on that. So I don’t know what was behind 
that, but they’ve done what they’ve done. And you know, I’ve 
said this before — governments come and governments go. 
And we’ll see what happens. 
 
Now the government’s saying they’re changing and they’re 
getting rid of Bill 40, and then all of a sudden, but there’s parts 
they want to keep. There’s parts of Bill 40 they want to keep; 
there’s a reason why. Is it the part that allowed them to 
dissolve? And they talk about that, windup, dissolution of a 
Crown corporation. So there are many, you know, when we 
close or get rid of . . . I mean, people’s interpretations of that 
. . . Sometime I think they’re going to want to have government 
. . . I know in committee we’re going to have an opportunity, 
and my colleagues will have an opportunity to ask the 
government some questions. But at the end of the day it isn’t 
strictly the concerns and the questions we have. It’s what 
residents have asked us to ask of this government of the day. 
 
The government is supposed to represent all people. So we’re 
hoping at the end of the day they’ll be able to explain exactly 
why we have the legislation we have, and why did they wind it 
down? And if you say you’re going to get rid of the Bill 40, 
why do you keep parts of it? You know, you pick and choose 
what you want. And I think some people are really finding that 
very odd. Like, why would you keep parts of it? Because they 
want to have their definition. 
 
So I think we’ll have an opportunity for more questions. We’ll 
go into committee and we’ll get those, and hopefully we can get 
some answers as to why the government . . . And maybe we’ll 
find out later there’s a reason why. It might be a good reason. 
I’m not sure. At this point I just know people are watching. 
They’re very concerned, which we are concerned . . . 
 
[16:15] 
 
Any time you have a government saying they’re not going to do 
something but they have legislation, or they’re amending it, 
there’s an opportunity for them to do what . . . And I think 

sometimes the residents of our province want answers. And 
hopefully we can get some of the answers and find out why 
they just didn’t take Bill 40 and scrap it totally, in light of the 
concerns that they heard from Saskatchewan residents, that they 
don’t want their Crowns messed with in any way. 
 
So having said that, Mr. Speaker, I have got an opportunity to 
say a few comments about that, but I also wanted to, you know, 
stress the concern that . . . Many people out of our good 
province, and the good people of our province, are concerned 
about STC. And when, when is some service going to come 
back to them? Because the private sector did not take over as 
the government said, oh, reassured them that, you know, the 
private sector will take over. Well that’s not happening. You 
know, that goes on the government’s shoulders to take care of 
it. 
 
So now the government can hopefully take care of it. And I 
encourage people: don’t give up. Don’t quit sending letters to 
your MLAs, to the Premier, to the ministers. Ask them. They 
owe you that. They owe that to the people of this province. You 
said the private sector would take over. It’s not happening. You 
have an obligation now to the people that elect you and the 
people that you represent in this whole province, from the South 
to the North to the East to the West. You have an obligation to 
represent those people. So I would encourage them to get a hold 
of their MLAs, the Premier. Send letters to the ministers, and 
asking them to explain how they are going to provide this 
service that they said the private sector would do. 
 
So with that, I don’t have any further comments, Mr. Speaker. 
So I’m prepared to adjourn debate on Bill No. 99. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 99, The Interpretation Amendment 
Act, 2017 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 103 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 103 — The Land 
Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and it is my pleasure 
this afternoon to rise and enter into debate on Bill No. 103, The 
Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017. I will make a similar 
confession as did my colleague from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre and preface my comments by stating that I 
am not a lawyer either. I know that comes as some surprise, Mr. 
Speaker, but I do want to say that there are a number of things 
that I appreciate about some of the . . . not only the minister’s 
statements in second reading, but also the report by the Law 
Reform Commission of Saskatchewan, the supporting 
document or the document that sort of brought about these 
changes to the land contracts Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 



3496 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2018 

In second reading comments by the minister — and I’m just 
going to come to those — it was noted that this Act came out of 
this report, Mr. Speaker, that there was a report that was put 
forward in 2014 at the request of the then minister looking at 
the land contracts Act. So back in 2014, in fact March of 2013 
in fact as it states on the front of that paper, there were a 
number of recommendations that were made with regard to this 
Act. 
 
So when we’re talking about the land contracts Act, I suppose 
there’s a few things that we should make clear as we’re talking 
about it and what the intent of it is. This bill changes 
foreclosure proceedings in the province, Mr. Speaker, and it 
doesn’t deal with farm mortgages, I think is a major 
clarification that should be made. 
 
It notes that we require a pre-action process for foreclosure, 
which is set out as a bit of a protection for the person who has 
the mortgage. And in fact this piece of legislation goes back 70 
years. It came in as a bit of consumer protection piece of 
legislation. And I think it’s reasonable after 70 years and 
perhaps more frequently that we go back and make sure that 
legislation passed in this Assembly is still meeting the needs, 
the current needs. So I do sincerely appreciate this report and 
the thoroughness of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some things change if this bill passes and some things remain 
the same. One of the things that remains the same is the time 
period between the notice and the hearing, which is 60 days I 
believe, if memory serves. But it also proposes to repeal two 
bills so I think that’s something that always when we’re looking 
at repealing legislation, it requires probably a higher level of 
oversight. 
 
The first one that is proposed to be repealed is The Home 
Owners’ Protection Act, deemed to be no longer be relevant. 
This was, if I remember correctly, a very specific piece of 
legislation that came in in the ’80s when we were witnessing a 
number of foreclosures. The other is The Agreements of Sale 
Cancellation Act, and elements of that Act are proposed to be 
moved into this new bill, Mr. Speaker. So those are some of the 
substantive changes that are proposed here. And again this bill 
takes into consideration recommendations done from a report 
by the Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan. 
 
Just to highlight a little bit of this work, if people haven’t had a 
chance to look at the work of the Law Reform Commission, it is 
worth a look, Mr. Speaker. In fact it’s very helpful in terms of 
the appendices around looking at cross-jurisdictional issues. It 
does a bit of a case study and looks at what’s going on in other 
jurisdictions across Canada and does a bit of a side-by-side 
comparison there, Mr. Speaker. With limited time sometimes 
that we have in this Assembly to discuss bills, I think that that is 
very important background, not only for members on the 
government side and the minister, but also for members on this 
side so we can fulfill our role of oversight. So I do want to give 
a little nod of appreciation to those who have compiled this 
work. It also goes through some of the concerns with the 
existing legislation and makes some proposals with regard to 
changes. 
 
And you know, when we’re talking about foreclosure of 
someone’s home, Mr. Speaker, this is, you know, as you would 

imagine, a highly charged . . . very important to get right. And 
again, I noted earlier in my comments that this is intended to 
provide some level of protection for those who carry the 
mortgage, homeowners, Mr. Speaker. And I think it is very 
important that we do provide that level of protection. When you 
think about someone in the process of potentially losing their 
home, that is often, you know, the main asset that any person or 
any family in this province has. It’s often the retirement plan for 
many families who, you know, may not have investments 
otherwhere. This is the main investment. 
 
And of course, there are all sorts of I mean practicalities about 
owning your own home, and you know, memory making and 
family. I mean all of us have very strong memories, I’m sure, 
and attachments to home, so I bring that in. Maybe you can tell 
again that I’m a bit more of a social worker than a lawyer but I 
think that those things, they are important and I make no 
apologies for that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But when I was doing my research for this bill, I came across 
something that’s given me some real, real pause. Again I learn 
things every day in this job, Mr. Speaker, but one of the things 
that I learned very recently is that the Canadian Bankers 
Association keeps a very detailed list of the number of 
foreclosures or mortgages in arrears in any jurisdiction in any 
province in Canada. And it has quite an extensive list — comes 
out, I believe, quarterly — in every province. So there’s a 
national number, percentage, and then province by province, 
and it keeps very detailed lists. And they do have the website 
there. There’s comments from aside here that are . . . This is 
very important and I think the people of the province would 
want to hear this. 
 
So when this legislation was introduced, it was November of 
2017, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps ironically, perhaps just by 
serendipity, I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, is when we also 
received . . . November 2017 was also when we received the 
latest update from the Canadian Bankers Association with 
regard to the percentage of arrears to total number of mortgages 
in each of the jurisdictions. So the Canadian overall rate is point 
two four per cent. So percentage of mortgages in Canada that 
are in arrears, arrears as defined by three months or more in 
nonpayment, Mr. Speaker, the national average is point two 
four per cent. 
 
And of course, Atlantic Canada has been going through some 
difficult times. They’re resource dependent. Their rate is point 
five four per cent, Mr. Speaker. Some other jurisdictions fare a 
little better. Quebec is right around the national average. 
Ontario, there’s a very low rate, point nine per cent. Alberta of 
course, you know, they’ve also gone through some difficult 
times with a downturn in the resource economy as has 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Their rate is a little bit above the 
national average at point four three per cent, but BC [British 
Columbia] at point one six per cent. 
 
But what was really surprising, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that 
Saskatchewan’s rate is point seven four per cent, three times the 
national average. And that I think should give us all some 
concern. Of course we’re still talking less than a percentage, but 
three times the national average I don’t think is . . . We’re not 
on the right end of this one, Mr. Speaker. And any time we’re 
talking about mortgage rates and foreclosures, you know, I do 



March 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3497 

have some concern about what even a slight increase to interest 
rates might do to that rate in our province, a rate that is already 
three times the national average. 
 
And certainly I can understand where some of those pressures 
are coming from. I know like many people in this Assembly 
have spent a lot of time on the doorstep and talking to people 
across this province, and they are feeling a lot of pressure, a lot 
of pressure around affordability. And some of that, you know, 
some of that, to be fair, is a result of lower oil prices but also to 
be fair, also because of decisions made directly by this 
government. And I’m just going to pause for a second here. 
 
Homeowners have a limited, often you know, have tight 
budgets. We’ve seen a number of — I believe it’s five — 
SaskPower increases in the last couple of years. That has cut 
into affordability, home affordability for people across the 
province. The latest budget, we have seen PST on home 
insurance. Of course municipal budgets have also come forward 
with significant tax increases. And I think, without exception 
they have indicated that at least part . . . I know when my 
municipal tax bill came there was a portion set aside, 
highlighted very strongly, that was attributed directly to cuts to 
municipalities from the provincial government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And all of these things do impact the affordability of homes in 
the province. So hopefully we are just getting the foreclosure 
processes in order as a matter of process and just, you know, in 
good practice cleaning up legislation, making it more simple, 
modernizing it. 
 
But I hope that we’re not also doing that in anticipation of, you 
know, an influx of people who need these protections. I 
certainly hope not, Mr. Speaker. But given that we have three 
times the national rate of mortgages in arrears, I think that’s 
something that we should not take lightly. You know, any time 
we’re three times on the wrong end of any statistic — which 
happens unfortunately a little too frequently when we think of 
things like domestic violence and rates of drinking and driving 
— I think that it’s something that we should set our minds to 
fixing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Of course, you know, increased costs have not been the only 
pressure on families and affordability of homes in this province. 
We’ve seen downward pressure on wages, particularly public 
sector wages, but there’s an impact around the province. I’m 
not sure exactly where we’re at despite, you know, sitting in 
this Assembly and listening intently. I’m not sure exactly where 
we’re at with that 3.5 per cent reduction mandate. But it 
certainly does, it does factor into the affordability of homes. 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, if you don’t have a job it’s very, 
very difficult to maintain your mortgage payments. And that’s 
something that we’ve seen. 
 
To be fair of course, within the resource sector, those connected 
to the resource sector jobs and also folks who, you know, we 
know very closely — the cleaners who we worked with very 
closely in this building, teachers and EAs [educational 
assistants] in classrooms . . . Unfortunately we’ve been told to 
expect another challenging budget, which I’m afraid means that 
more people are going to lose their jobs in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
So when people are in arrears on their mortgages and they’re 
losing their homes, it doesn’t do great things for the economy. 
Of course it has implications for the real estate market. It has 
impact with regards to neighbourhoods, schools, all of those 
things, Mr. Speaker. So again, as I said, I hope that we are just 
modernizing this Act and acting on some of the 
recommendations of the Law Reform Commission. But I do 
have concerns about that statistic, and I’d like to look a little bit 
further into that website and the history. 
 
Perhaps, you know, we hear a lot about what was happening a 
decade ago in this province. For a little bit of a history lesson, 
perhaps it would be interesting for folks to know that in 2007 
the rate for Saskatchewan — remembering that today it’s point 
seven four per cent of total mortgages — in 2007 that number 
was point three per cent. So that number has more than doubled 
in the last decade in this province. So that’s a number of 
mortgages that are in arrears. 
 
So I think when we are, you know, we are taking stock of the 
last decade, I think we need to give a full and fair accounting of 
things that are going on. And this is certainly something that is 
not moving in the right direction and is not the type of area, 
economic indicator that we want to be on this side of, Mr. 
Speaker — three times the national average. 
 
With regard to the legislation itself there were, as I’ve 
mentioned, a number of recommendations that were put forth. 
There were some stakeholder consultations that were conducted 
before this report was compiled and released in 2013. And I 
know that our critic, who is a very capable woman, will be 
doing her due diligence and contacting some of those 
stakeholders and going very carefully. In fact she probably 
already has; she’s that diligent, Mr. Speaker. And I know that 
she’ll have a lot to say in committee and ask the questions that 
competent women such as herself always do, Mr. Speaker. But I 
will leave that to her in committee. 
 
And I think with that will conclude my remarks on Bill No. 
103, and I will move to adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Lakeview has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 103, The Land Contracts 
(Actions) Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 104 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 104 — The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017/Code des droits de 
la personne de la Saskatchewan de 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 



3498 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2018 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter 
discussion today on Bill No. 104, The Saskatchewan Human 
Rights Code, 2017. I think it’s important to start by looking to 
the minister’s second reading speech and just pointing out 
exactly what the Human Rights Code does and what it is. And 
just to look at his remarks, I think he says this quite succinctly, 
that it’s: 
 

. . . essential legislation that promotes and protects 
individual dignity and equality rights. The code prohibits 
discrimination based on grounds set out in the code and 
also includes a bill of rights, making it illegal for someone 
to violate another person’s fundamental rights and 
freedoms. 

 
So I just want to take us to Part 1, the Bill of Rights here. So it 
outlines in Part 1 of this particular piece legislation, it outlines 
the right to freedom of conscience, which is: 
 

Every person and every class of persons shall enjoy the 
right to freedom of conscience, opinion and belief and 
freedom of religious association, teaching, practice and 
worship. 

 
The second point under the Bill of Rights is the right to free 
expression: 
 

Every person and every class of persons shall, under the 
law, enjoy the right to freedom of expression through all 
means of communication, including, without limiting the 
generality of the foregoing, the arts, speech, the press or 
radio, television or any other broadcasting device. 

 
The next point, the right to free association: 
 

Every person and every class of persons shall enjoy the 
right to peaceable assembly with others and to form with 
others associations of any character under the law. 

 
The next point, the right to freedom from arbitrary 
imprisonment: 
 

Every person and every class of persons shall enjoy the 
right to freedom from arbitrary arrest or detention. 

 
And the final point under the Bill of Rights — that would be 
Part 1 of our human rights legislation — is: 
 

Every qualified voter resident in Saskatchewan shall enjoy 
the right to exercise freely his or her franchise in all 
elections and shall possess the right to require that no 
Legislative Assembly shall continue for a period in excess 
of five years. 

 
The second part is the prohibition of certain discriminatory 
practices, Mr. Speaker. And then it goes on in other sections to 
talk about administration of that bill. 
 
But in particular, this bill before us today, Bill 104, makes the 
Human Rights Code bilingual, as we’ve seen here in my time 
here in the House and prior to it, that the government of the day 
moves to try to follow our official bilingualism policy and 
move our bills to being bilingual. 

This bill also makes several changes to language throughout the 
Act but does not change the content of the code. For example, it 
changes the word “if” to “where,” and “shall enjoy the right to” 
changes to “has the right to.” 
 
I think it’s important to take a look at human rights complaints. 
Actually, you know what? I’d like to talk about discrimination 
or what prohibited grounds actually means. So we’ve got 
several different pieces under prohibited grounds. Actually we 
added one. I know my colleague from Saskatoon Centre worked 
really hard on adding gender identity and worked with the then 
minister to get that particular piece added. I know he would’ve 
liked to have seen the government go a little further on gender 
expression. So prohibited grounds here: religion, creed, marital 
status, family status. So family status is the status of being in a 
parent and child relationship. Sex is another prohibited ground, 
and that’s discrimination on the basis of pregnancy and 
pregnancy-related illnesses deemed to . . . on the basis of sex. 
We’ve got sexual orientation, disability, age, colour, ancestry, 
nationality, place of origin, race or perceived race, receipt of 
public assistance and, as I said, gender identity. So those are 
prohibited grounds, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d just like to go to the report, actually the Human Rights 
Commission’s annual report, to talk about some of the 
complaints that have come before, in terms of numbers that 
have come before the Human Rights Commission. So the total 
number of complaints in the 2016-2017 year were 444. The 
total number of complaints formalized in 2016-2017 were 141. 
 
It’s interesting when we look at some of the larger categories 
that stick out. So disability was the highest number, which was 
63.1 in terms of the grounds for complaints. Areas in which I’m 
interested in, just through my own work and particularly 
interested at this time of the Me Too movement and Time’s Up 
movement, we had a 17 per cent rate or percentage of 
complaints were based around sexual harassments, an area in 
which I’m very interested in my work. 
 
I’ll talk about this in a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, but before 
being elected for about three years I worked in a little unit of 
government called the work and family unit, under the 
Department of Labour. And we actually put together a booklet, 
which I’m quite proud of and I’ll talk a little bit about that too, 
called Pregnancy, Parenting and the Workplace, which was a 
booklet for employers and employees to both understand their 
rights and responsibilities because those two things are very tied 
together. 
 
But that area that really interests me is discrimination on the 
basis of sex, particularly around pregnancy, which saw 11.3 per 
cent of the complaints to the Human Rights Commission were 
based on that, and 4.3 per cent were on family status. 
 
So I’m just going to give you a couple of examples from the 
annual report on what those might look like, and I’d like to talk 
a little bit further about those too. I come to this legislature 
actually as a parenting advocate. I am a midwifery advocate, a 
breastfeeding advocate, and an advocate generally for families 
to make sure they have the support they need to be the best 
possible parents and to raise healthy children. 
 
And around the breastfeeding piece, that is actually something 



March 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3499 

that, still to this day, that it is actually technically protected — 
the right to breastfeed is technically protected under our human 
rights legislation. It’s not explicitly laid out, but it’s on the basis 
of sex, when it comes to pregnancy, and subsequently after 
pregnancy comes feeding your child, Mr. Speaker. And still to 
this day I’ve been quite connected in that world of parents, and 
mothers in particular, who nurse their kids for a very long time 
and who are also breastfeeding advocates. 
 
And it still amazes me that women get asked to go feed their 
child in a washroom stall, or get told that they can’t nurse their 
child or feed their child in a public setting. That is in fact 
prohibited, and that happens fairly frequently. You see the news 
stories pop up, but discrimination on the basis of sex, 
particularly around pregnancy, continues to happen. And the 
fact that we have as many complaints that we do, that is a high 
number. 
 
So I’ll just talk in the section on his report around . . . the 
Commissioner’s report around mediation, which is one of the 
pillars of our Human Rights Commission. He mentions, there’s 
a particular anecdote: “Time away from work for child’s 
healthcare a family status issue.” So this is the anecdote: 
 

A month after Jeremy started working for his employer, he 
asked for a week off work due to an emergency medical 
assessment and treatment for his young son. 
 
Throughout, Jeremy kept his supervisor apprised of what 
was happening, and the time he needed off. After this week 
away, he approached his manager with a doctor’s note to 
request 2 additional weeks while his son was being treated. 
The manager asked him to wait for a few minutes, and then 
returned with a letter of termination. 
 
The employer said that there were some performance 
concerns that factored in to their decision to terminate the 
complainant’s employment. Parties agreed to $12,000.00 
in compensation for damage to dignity, and the respondent 
provided a letter of reference. 

 
So that was managed to be solved through mediation, but you 
can’t terminate a person while they’re on leave. That is a 
discrimination based on family status. Here’s another example: 
“Complaint over pregnancy-related termination resolved.” 
 

Jenna was a young adult who had been working for a 
chemical manufacturing company for 4 months when she 
learned that she was pregnant. She experienced 
complications and had to be hospitalized. Although she 
returned to work, she was occasionally absent because of 
illness. The employer was aware of Jenna’s pregnancy and 
expressed concern about her complications and her age. 
Her supervisor also asked Jenna to consider resigning. 
 
Medical complications meant that Jenna was away from 
her job, and she was terminated the day before she was 
supposed to return to work. Jenna filed a complaint 
because she believed her employer had not accommodated 
her on the basis of age, disability, and pregnancy, contrary 
to Section 16 of the Code. The parties settled the complaint 
with a total payment of $27,500 for damage to dignity, 
expenses, and release of the right to reinstatement. 

So discrimination on the basis of sex . . . I think discrimination 
in all cases is not good, Mr. Speaker, but like I said, I come to 
the place where my own background is in this particular area, 
and it interests me that this is still a very big issue. 
 
So what is discrimination? It’s the harmful treatment . . . So I’m 
going to take you to the pamphlet, or it’s actually a booklet that 
I was involved with when I was with the work and family unit, 
called Pregnancy, Parenting and the Workplace, again which 
was a guide for both employers and employees to make sure 
that both knew their rights and responsibilities. 
 
[16:45] 
 

Discrimination is the harmful treatment of an individual or 
group, based on certain personal characteristics. The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Code establishes which 
characteristics (or “prohibited grounds of discrimination”) 
are covered. [And we’ve already talked about that.] They 
include sex, pregnancy and family status. [So this was a 
book specific to this topic.] Discrimination does not need 
to be intentional to be illegal. For example, a rule or a 
policy may be developed for good business reasons but 
have an unintended, negative effect on pregnant 
employees. Discrimination can be built right into systems 
or standard business practices. For instance, a company 
may require all employees to work full-time and meet the 
same physical demands. A pregnant employee may need 
lighter duties, shorter hours or other changes in order to 
keep on working. Often, indirect discrimination occurs 
when an employer does not meet the duty to accommodate 
. . . [which is discussed later on in the handbook]. 

 
So again, discrimination based on sex, because sex includes 
“. . . discrimination because of pregnancy, pregnancy-related 
illness, childbirth, or any circumstance related to pregnancy or 
childbirth [which includes breastfeeding].” 
 
What is discrimination based on family status? So family status 
again “. . . means the status of being in a parent and child 
relationship. [But] “Parent” and “child” are interpreted broadly 
to include anyone acting in those roles.” 
 
So some examples . . . Actually family status back when this 
pamphlet was written or booklet was written, in 2006, was a 
relatively new addition to human rights law and there were still 
questions at that time. But some examples are that: 
 

. . . employers cannot discriminate against an employee for 
some of the following reasons: 
 

she or he is a parent. (e.g., refusing to hire someone 
because he or she has children) 
 
he or she is the child or parent of a particular person 
(e.g., firing someone because of a dispute with the 
employee’s parent) 
 
[and] negative attitudes or stereotypes about employees 
with family obligations (e.g. refusing promotions or 
training opportunities to parents on the assumption that 
they will take more time off work or be less committed 
to their jobs than employees without children). 



3500 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2018 

This is all really important as more women move into the 
workplace. Obviously the Human Rights Code protects all 
employees and all people in Saskatchewan, but when it comes 
to employment, it had specific relevance or has specific 
relevance as more women are in the workplace. 
 
And I still hear issues where a woman in an interview was 
asked if she’s planning on having children. So I think a little, 
important little piece in this pamphlet on page 48 is: 
 

Can an employer ask job applicants about their plans to 
have children? 
 
Most employers know they can’t refuse to hire someone 
for a discriminatory reason. But the Code also prohibits 
questions that might lead to employers eliminating job 
applicants simply because of their potential to become 
parents. Employers cannot ask job applicants about sex, 
family status or marital status on application forms or in 
interviews. For example, employers should be careful not 
to: 
 

advertise for childless employees or indicate they prefer 
them 
 
ask applicants if they are pregnant, or using birth control 
 
[or] ask applicants about their plans to marry, or to have 
or adopt children 

 
The Human Rights Code and this piece of legislation, which is 
modestly being amended again just to be bilingual and to make 
some relatively minor language changes, is a really important 
piece of legislation for people here in Saskatchewan. And I 
think human rights legislation is an ever-growing body, or 
should be an ever-growing body of work where we’re reflective 
in thinking about how we make sure that the most vulnerable in 
our society are protected and that we all know our rights and 
responsibilities. 
 
I know that there’s some concern around the number of 
complaints coming forward to the Human Rights Commission 
has increased over time and, like I said, it still amazes me that 
there’s that high of a number around, while the complaints 
around disability and ancestry . . . Actually, our Aboriginal 
ancestry is 2.1 per cent. 
 
So I would actually, I think that number should lead us to think 
if everybody who is protected under the Human Rights Code 
feels comfortable and confident making complaints, Mr. 
Speaker, because I know in my office and in my daily 
interactions with people, I hear that racism is a real concern for 
indigenous people here in this province. And so having that 
number of 2.1 per cent of total complaints because of 
Aboriginal ancestry, I wonder if there’s ways that the Human 
Rights Commission could do its work to make sure that 
everyone feels comfortable coming forward. 
 
Around other ancestry, it’s about 7.8 per cent. But like I said, I 
am fascinated and frankly appalled around the piece around 
sexual harassment, which is at 17 per cent, and then pregnancy 
and family status. But it’s important to remember how very 
critical this kind of legislation is to all of us here in 

Saskatchewan and that it’s an evolving document over time. 
 
I would have liked to have seen breastfeeding actually explicitly 
added at some point in time under sex, but who knows, that 
might come at some point in time. And perhaps gender 
expression will make it in there at some point in time as well. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that the critic will have 
some questions in committee when this bill gets there, for Bill 
No. 104, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017. But 
with that, at this point in time I would like to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill 104, The Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Code, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 105 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 105 — The 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a 
pleasure to join in with debate and so today I’m going to join in 
with Bill No. 105, The Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Consequential Amendment Act. And it’s always nice to follow 
up when another colleague is talking about the Act, because it’s 
really good to hear their perspective of the changes that’ll be 
happening. 
 
So we know that this Act accompanies The Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Code, 2017 and makes consequential 
amendments to the Saskatchewan employment code. And so, 
Mr. Speaker, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code is being 
repealed and replaced with a new bilingual statute, which I 
think is wonderful when we can include our French language in 
some of our legislation as well. And so therefore references to 
the name of the old Act in the Saskatchewan employment code 
will be updated to reference the new Act. So oftentimes some of 
the changes that we make will affect other legislation that we 
have, and in this case that’s what’s happening. 
 
So the importance about the Human Rights Code is that it 
enforces the code through the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission. The Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission is 
individuals who’ve been appointed so that if there has been an 
infringement or a concern, they do an investigation with that. 
And I was looking up to see who was on that committee and I 
was pretty impressed that they’re quite the diverse group of 
individuals with different backgrounds and education and 
experiences. So I think we all can have a lot of confidence in 
their abilities to make these decisions. 
 



March 19, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3501 

And the Human Rights Code is very important too because the 
job of it is to protect and promote human rights and discourage 
discrimination against everyone living in Saskatchewan. So we 
know that that’s so very important. And as we’re progressing in 
our world, we know that it’s important to respect each other in 
our diverse communities in society. 
 
And so some of the protection against discrimination would be 
because of religion, sex, sexual orientation, disability, age, 
colour, nationality, and many other examples. And so people 
are protected against discrimination in their workplace, in 
education, when they’re applying for services, or even when 
they’re receiving public services. We’ve got to ensure that 
people have access to services. And there’s many other areas 
that we have to really identify if there is a form of 
discrimination and ensure that all people have ability to receive 
services when they need it and not be judged or taken advantage 
of based on who they are. So that’s a little bit of background 
with that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, one thing that I wanted to talk a little bit 
about was The Saskatchewan Employment Act and the 
importance of that. Mr. Speaker, with the changes to the House 
here with our new leader officially there of the opposition, some 
of our critic areas were changed and one of my critic areas that 
was added to my portfolio was Labour and Workers’ 
Compensation Board and ensuring workplace safety. And so 
I’m really excited to have this new portfolio and looking 
forward to working with individuals across our province who 
are in the workplace, and we know that includes everybody. 
 
And so The Saskatchewan Employment Act, it protects the 
health and safety of Saskatchewan workers. So it’s very 
important and it ensures there’s a minimum standard of safety 
in employment and standards for employers in these 
employments. And it improves the compliance with regulatory 
standards and it also ensures effective enforcement of labour 
laws in the province. 
 
So this is a very important Act and everybody is governed 
under it. Same with The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code. 
And so both of these Acts work together to ensure that we have 
health and safety for all workers, minimum standards and 
regulatory standards and effective enforcement. So I think this 
is an important amendment to be had. It’s really important for 
us to really take these Acts seriously. 
 
And when we look at all the employees in our province and 
some of them have maybe some union representation that helps 
them ensure that their rights are being represented, but these 
Acts apply to everybody even if they aren’t in unionized jobs, 
which would be a lot of people in our communities. We’ve got 
to also ensure that their workplaces are safe and that their 
employers are held accountable to ensure that they have safe 
workplaces, that their employer has to treat them with respect. 
And so that’s very important. 
 
And we need to know that there’s the level of accessibility for 
individuals who need that. And I think in Saskatchewan we 
have a long ways to go with regards to that kind of stuff. But 
we’re making some progress, but we’ve got to be mindful of 
accessibility. And I think even in this building there’s some 
areas here that are not very accessible for individuals and we’ve 

got to be mindful for that. 
 
And I think with a lot of changes within our communities like 
with having dogs that might be accompanying people who have 
post-traumatic stress disorder, some of those individuals have 
faced interesting complications when they’re going to, say, 
restaurants and people saying no dogs are allowed. And then 
they explain, they have to explain their disorder. And we really 
hope one day we get to a point that people don’t have to explain 
that. 
 
So I think with changes with these Acts will help with that, and 
I look forward to . . . I know the critic with regards to this 
portfolio will consult with the stakeholders and she has lots of 
questions for the minister in the committee. So I’ll move to 
adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Prince Albert Northcote has 
moved to adjourn debate on The Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2017, Bill No. 105. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, so that a committee may sit 
tonight, I will move a motion that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved to 
adjourn the House for committees. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 1:30 
tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3471 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3471 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3471 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Goudy ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3471 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3471 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3471 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3472 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Yom Ha Shoah 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3472 
 International Trade Legislative Conference 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3472 
 Social Work Week  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3472 
 Z99 Radiothon  
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3473 
 Champions of Mental Health Event 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3473 
 Reconciliation Through Treaty Education 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3473 
 Holocaust Memorial Service 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3473 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Response to Fentanyl Crisis 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3473 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3474 
 Support for Truth and Reconciliation Calls to Action 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3475 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3475 
 Government Response to First Nations and Métis Nation of Saskatchewan 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3475 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3475 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3475 
 Management of Provincial Economy 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3476 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3476 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3477 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3477 
 Public Service, Crown Corporations, and Government-Owned Buildings 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3477 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3477 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Federal-Provincial Agreement to Support Early Learning and Child Care 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3478 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3479 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3479 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 121 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3480 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3480 
 Bill No. 122 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2018 
 Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3483 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3484 
 



 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 74 — The Evidence Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative de 2017 sur la preuve 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3485 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 3486 
 Bill No. 96 — The Choice of Court Agreements (Hague Convention Implementation) Act 
 Loi sur les accords d’élection de for (mise en œuvre de la Convention de La Haye) 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3486 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 3487 
 Bill No. 94 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3487 
 Bill No. 95 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3488 
 Bill No. 97 — The Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3489 
 Bll No. 98 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi modificative diverse (résolution des conflits familiaux) de 201 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3491 
 Bill No. 99 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2)/Loi modificative no 2 de 2017 sur l’interprétation 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3494 
 Bill No. 103 — The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3495 
 Bill No. 104 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017 
 Code des droits de la personne de la Saskatchewan de 2017 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3498 
 Bill No. 105 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3500 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


