


















































April 10, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 39A  TUESDAY, APRIL 10, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3725 
 April 10, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I request leave to proceed directly to 
orders of the day. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 
leave to proceed directly to orders of the day. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Leave has been granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 

TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY 
ESTIMATES 

 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to 
submit the estimates and supplementary estimates accompanied 
by a message from His Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — Would you please rise for a message from the 
Lieutenant Governor. The message is as follows: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits estimates of certain 
sums required for the service of the province for the 12 
months ending March 31st, 2019, and supplementary 
estimates — March of certain sums required for the service 
of the province for the 12 months ending March 31st, 
2018, and recommends the same to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Honourable Thomas Molloy, Lieutenant Governor, 
province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Please be seated. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, colleagues, and visitors. 
Mr. Speaker, today I have the great honour and the 
responsibility of delivering my first budget as Saskatchewan’s 
Finance minister. 
 
For the past few weeks this budget speech has been just about 
the only thing that I could think about. But then on Friday 
evening, that changed. Everything changed because, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m also the MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] for Humboldt, and this past Friday Humboldt 
suffered its darkest day. 
 
It’s the kind of unimaginable tragedy that no community should 
ever have to endure, and that’s what I’ve been thinking about 
these past days. I’ve been thinking about the heroic response of 
the medical professionals and the first responders who saved 

lives and prevented this horrible tragedy from being even worse 
than it already was. I’ve been thinking about the amazing 
leadership that I’ve seen in Humboldt and Tisdale and Nipawin. 
I’ve been thinking about all those parents, the ones whose boys 
were injured, the ones who received the worst news they ever 
could. I’ve been thinking about my community of Humboldt, 
how everyone has pulled together to help and support one 
another. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Humboldt is strong, and somehow we’ll figure a 
way to get through this. And it’s going to be tough but, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve been thinking about the overwhelming love and 
support that Humboldt and the team and the families have 
received from the people throughout Saskatchewan and across 
Canada and around the world. But most of all I’ve been 
thinking about the 15 lives that were cut short far too soon. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, even though I haven’t thought much about the 
budget speech in the last few days, the business of the province 
does go on. And it’s my job to deliver a budget, and so I will. 
But first I would like to ask this Assembly and all the guests 
who have joined us here today to honour the memory of those 
that we have lost with a moment of silence. 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you. 
 
I am honoured to rise in this Assembly to present our 
government’s 2018-2019 budget. I would like to acknowledge, 
before I begin, the attendance of my family, and of course 
family means more than anything now. I have with me Crystal, 
my oldest daughter, and Rusty, her husband, and their children, 
James and Lucas. I have with me Shannon and her partner, 
Brian Burgess, and Shannon’s children, Makenna and Emryk. 
And of course many of you have seen from time to time my 
fiancé; Tom Wildeman is here with us again today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not all three of my daughters are here today, but 
it’s nice to have two. And you know, I think back when I first 
decided to enter politics back in 1999, I was the mother of these 
three young children, and I had absolutely no political 
experience. I could not have ever imagined that I would one day 
have the great honour and the responsibility of standing in this 
Assembly and delivering the provincial budget on behalf of the 
government and people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But you know what would have been even harder to imagine 
back in 1999? It would have been even harder to imagine at that 
time that 19 years later my now-adult children would still be 
living and working and raising families right here in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the main reasons I’ve 
entered politics, so that my kids and everyone else’s kids would 
at least have the chance to stay in this great province. So it 
means a lot to me to say that my daughters and their families 
are not just visiting Saskatchewan today. This is their home. 
This is their Assembly. And, Mr. Speaker, this will also be the 
longest that they’ll ever have to listen to me and they can’t 
interrupt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has a plan and that plan is on 
track. One year ago our government charted a three-year course 



3726 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2018 

to reduce our province’s dependency on resource revenue and 
to balance the budget by 2019. Today’s budget keeps that plan 
on track by controlling government spending, by making 
important investments in health care, education, and social 
services for Saskatchewan people, and by keeping our economy 
strong. 
 
At the same time we have listened to Saskatchewan people. We 
have a new Premier who has listened to Saskatchewan people, 
and we have heard that some adjustments were needed to the 
course we charted in last year’s budget. And that’s why, even 
before today’s budget, the Premier made two important 
announcements, increasing education funding and reinstating 
the PST [provincial sales tax] exemption on life, health, and 
agriculture insurance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is another issue where our new Premier and 
our government have listened to the people of Saskatchewan. 
As you know, today we face deadlines, threats, and ultimatums 
from a federal government intent on imposing a carbon tax on 
Saskatchewan families. There are some who say we should 
wave the white flag and surrender to those threats, but the 
overwhelming majority of Saskatchewan people say no. Mr. 
Speaker, our Premier has listened. Our government has listened, 
and this budget contains no carbon tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people have told us they want their 
government to maintain a strong and steady course towards a 
balanced budget. This budget accomplishes that, keeping 
Saskatchewan on track to return to a balanced budget in 
2019-20 while ensuring that programs and services are 
sustainable now and into the future. It keeps our province on 
track by carefully controlling spending while balancing the 
need to support growth in our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has enjoyed a decade of growth that 
has seen our population increase by about 160,000 people. Our 
government always has supported that growth by making major 
investments in much-needed infrastructure. Once again this 
budget, our government is investing in schools. We’re investing 
in roads, in highways, and we’re investing in hospitals. 
 
In this budget we’re continuing to invest in the priorities of 
Saskatchewan people, in particular in health care, education, 
and social services, and we’re able to make all of these 
investments in this budget with no increases to tax rates. That 
means all provincial tax rates, including those for sales tax, 
income tax, and education property tax, remain the same. 
 
This budget does, however, remove the PST exemption for used 
light vehicles, effective April 11th. This aligns the province’s 
tax treatment of used light vehicles with every other jurisdiction 
in Canada that has a sales tax. The trade-in allowance to allow a 
deduction for the value of a trade-in when determining PST is 
being reinstated, so PST will only be paid on the difference in 
price between the trade-in and the purchase price of the vehicle. 
PST will not be charged for used vehicles gifted between 
qualifying family members such as spouses, parents, legal 
guardians, children, grandparents, grandchildren, and siblings. 
And unique to Saskatchewan, PST will not be applied to the 
private sales of used vehicles with a purchase price of up to 
$5,000. 
 

Mr. Speaker, our government’s fiscal plan is on track to return 
Saskatchewan to balance with a steadily improving outlook 
over the next four years. A deficit of 365 million is projected 
for this fiscal year. A return to balance is expected in 2019-20 
with a modest projected surplus of 6 million. Higher surpluses 
of 108 and 212 million respectively are forecast for 2020-21 
and 2021-22. 
 
Revenue is forecast at 14.24 billion in this budget, up about 80 
million from last year, largely due to higher non-renewable 
resource revenue, net income from government business 
enterprises, and other own-source revenue. Non-renewable 
resource revenue now accounts for just 10 per cent of the 
province’s total revenue, which is down from a high of 32 per 
cent in 2008-9. One of the main goals of our three-year budget 
plan was to reduce Saskatchewan’s reliance on resource 
revenue, and that plan is on track. 
 
Our government continues to control spending. An expense is 
forecast at 14.61 billion in this budget, which is down from last 
year by 200 million. 
 
Controlling compensation costs, the largest single budgetary 
expense for government, is key to keeping Saskatchewan’s 
fiscal plan on track. Employers and unions understand the fiscal 
environment and continue to bargain in good faith. Through the 
bargaining process, fair and equitable agreements will be 
reached. 
 
Beyond negotiated settlements, we’ve targeted the achievement 
of 70 million in savings over two years — 35 million in this 
budget and another 35 million next year. These savings will be 
accomplished largely through efficiency initiatives and attrition, 
as part of our government’s commitment to return to balance in 
2019-20. 
 
An example of positive change that is achieving both savings 
and efficiencies while still delivering the best possible service 
to Saskatchewan people is the creation of a single 
Saskatchewan Health Authority. Consolidating the 12 regional 
authorities was completed last year to improve front-line patient 
care for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Greater health authority integration and coordination has saved 
19 million in this budget, largely through lower salary and 
board costs and director costs and amalgamation of IT 
[information technology] services. That’s a 19-million-a-year 
reduction in administrative costs that can now be redirected to 
front-line workers. 
 
[13:45] 
 
A second example comes from the Ministry of Central Services, 
which reduced the number of government-owned vehicles, 
saving more than $5 million. Those are just two among many 
examples of government improving services while controlling 
spending to meet the challenge of lower revenue and the needs 
of a growing province. 
 
In the fiscal year just completed, expense is forecast to be down 
2 per cent, and in this budget, expense is forecast to be down an 
additional 1.4 per cent. Controlling spending ensures our 
government can continue to provide Saskatchewan people with 



April 10, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3727 

the high-quality programs and services they expect and deserve 
today, and that those services are sustainable into the future. 
 
This budget invests a record $5.77 billion to improve health 
care for all Saskatchewan people, up nearly 2.5 per cent from 
last year. That includes 3.5 billion for Saskatchewan Health 
Authority operating funding, up nearly 72 million from total 
funding last year to the 12 regional authorities. 
 
This budget provides funding to prepare for the opening of the 
Saskatchewan Hospital North Battleford later this year, as well 
as the 2019 opening of the Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Targeted funding in this budget will improve access to mental 
health, palliative care, and community-based primary health 
care services. We’re also investing an additional 700,000 this 
year to ensure universal, 100 per cent coverage of the HIV 
[human immunodeficiency virus] drugs for Saskatchewan 
people, as well as providing additional HIV services. 
 
We’re also investing more than 520,000 this year in a new 
program to ensure that babies born here in Saskatchewan 
hospitals are screened for hearing loss. Another new program 
will fulfill our government’s commitment to provide 
individualized funding for children with autism spectrum 
disorder. Initial funding of 4,000 per child under the age of six 
will be provided this year, for a total investment in this budget 
of $2.8 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the success of Saskatchewan students continues to 
be a priority of our government. This budget keeps 
Saskatchewan on track by providing a high-quality education 
for kindergarten to grade 12 students across Saskatchewan, and 
fulfills the Premier’s commitment to increase funding by 30 
million. As a result, Saskatchewan’s 27 school divisions will 
receive 1.87 billion in school operating funding for the 2018-19 
school year, up 1.6 per cent compared to last year. This will 
allow school divisions to continue to support the classroom by 
maintaining or hiring up to 400 teachers and other in-school 
professionals. 
 
This budget also provides nearly 77 million in child care 
funding, including 20.8 million in new federal funding through 
the Canada-Saskatchewan early learning and child care 
agreement. This will support more than 16,000 existing licensed 
child care spaces in Saskatchewan and help create 2,500 more 
spaces by 2020. 
 
Last year we heard from Saskatchewan people about the 
importance of our libraries, and in this budget libraries across 
Saskatchewan will continue to receive significant support 
through operating funding of more than $11 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a stable post-secondary education sector is crucial 
to our plan to keep Saskatchewan on track. This year’s 
Advanced Education budget is up 1.5 per cent to a total of 729 
million. That level of funding lets us provide stable funding to 
post-secondary institutions across Saskatchewan, with operating 
grants to our universities, colleges, and technical schools 
maintained at last year’s level. 
 
This budget provides more than 673 million in operating and 

capital grants to post-secondary institutions, including 470 
million to the University of Saskatchewan, University of 
Regina, and federated and affiliated colleges; 151 million to 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic and Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies and Gabriel Dumont Institute; 30 million to 
Saskatchewan’s regional colleges; and more than 22 million for 
capital repairs and maintenance throughout the post-secondary 
sector. 
 
Nearly 88 million is allocated in this budget to the U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan] College of Medicine, helping to 
ensure a successful college that provides quality medical 
education. 
 
Saskatchewan’s post-secondary students will also benefit from 
34 million in direct financial supports provided for in this 
budget. This budget also continues the graduate retention 
program, one of the most aggressive and successful youth 
retention programs in Canada, providing up to $20,000 in 
income tax credits to post-secondary graduates who live and 
work in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also keeps Saskatchewan on track by 
helping people in need. The budget for social services and 
assistance will increase by 25 million to a record $1.38 billion. 
This funding will help support Saskatchewan people who are 
most vulnerable — children in need, at-risk families, people 
experiencing disabilities, seniors, and people with low incomes. 
 
More than 10 million of this year’s increase in funding will be 
targeted to those in communities who provide direct daily care 
to adults with intellectual disabilities or mental health 
challenges and those who care for our most vulnerable children. 
This includes funding increases for foster families, 
community-based organizations that deliver day programs and 
residential services to people with intellectual disabilities, and 
other CBOs [community-based organization] that provide 
family-focused services. 
 
This year’s social services budget also contains additional 
increases that will support at-risk children and adults with 
intellectual disabilities, including nearly 10 million to continue 
moving people from Valley View Centre to new 
community-based homes; 9 million to provide services for 
children with intellectual disabilities aging into adult care, as 
well as for adults with intellectual disabilities whose needs have 
increased or who are in crisis; 4.5 million for extended family 
members who are caring for at-risk children and youth, keeping 
those young people connected to family, community, and 
culture; and 250,000 to operate a new group home in La Ronge 
for five adults with intellectual disabilities. 
 
Given the significant increase in overall social services funding 
in this budget, we’ve decided to review all current social 
programs and services to ensure dollars are spent where they do 
the most good. 
 
One of the things we looked at carefully was the Saskatchewan 
rental housing supplement. We decided to keep this benefit in 
place for people who are currently receiving it, as well as 
extend it to those who apply by June 30th of this year and are 
deemed eligible. As of July 1st, the intake of new applications 
for the supplement will be suspended. Social Services will be 



3728 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2018 

co-developing a new rental support program with the federal 
government as part of the new national housing strategy. No 
one who currently receives the supplement will experience any 
change. 
 
In making this decision, we noted that Saskatchewan’s vacancy 
was about 4.5 per cent in 2005 when the supplement was 
introduced. In contrast, Saskatchewan now has the highest 
vacancy rate among Western Canadian provinces at nearly 9 per 
cent in 2017 according to CMHC [Canada Mortgage and 
Housing Corporation] data. 
 
Vacancy rates in our government-owned social housing units is 
also at an all-time high. With this improvement in our rental 
housing market, it makes sense to focus funding in other areas 
of social services and assistance where the needs are more 
pressing. Throughout 2018-19 our government, through the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, will work closely with the 
federal government and its provincial-territory partners to 
ensure that the new national housing strategy benefits 
Saskatchewan people who need housing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government understands that many rural 
residents have a very legitimate concern about crime and safety 
and that more needs to be done. In this budget, our government 
continues to address the problem of rural crime by funding the 
protection and response team that was launched last summer. 
We’re confident that the protection and response team will 
provide an effective, long-term strategy for rural reduction in 
crime. 
 
Since being announced in August 2017, the team has made 
significant progress including the reassignment of 10 RCMP 
[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] positions to provide relief to 
detachments experiencing staff shortages. The team consists of 
258 armed officers who will have arrest and detention powers, 
including municipal police, RCMP, Ministry of Highways 
vehicle enforcement officers, and Ministry of Environment 
conservation officers. 
 
This budget provides 4.9 million in new funding from SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] for enhancements to the 
rural crime strategy. This includes funding for an additional 30 
police positions for phase 2 of the provincial combined traffic 
safety services unit. 
 
This budget also provides continued annual funding of 1 million 
from the Ministry of Corrections and Policing to address other 
recommendations of the caucus committee on crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget continues our government’s 
long-standing commitment to invest in infrastructure. Highway 
spending over the last three fiscal years has been nearly double 
the fuel tax collected into our highways budget, a far cry from 
the days when the fuel tax actually exceeded highway spending. 
This year major safety improvements are coming to many of 
Saskatchewan’s busiest highways as part of this year’s 924 
million highways and infrastructure budget. With this year’s 
budget, our government has now invested more than 3 billion 
into highways and infrastructure over the past three years. 
 
A decade of growth is changing traffic demands on our 
province’s transportation system. Our government understands 

the need to make our busiest highways safer and we’re also 
committed to getting exports to market faster and more 
effectively. 
 
This coming year about 51 million will be invested in several 
major safety projects. We’ll begin a series of twinning and 
passing lane projects on highways 6 and 39 between Regina and 
Estevan. Work will continue on the Warman and Martensville 
interchanges and on twinning Highway 7 between Vanscoy and 
Delisle. Two sets of passing lanes will be built on Highway 4 
between North Battleford and Cochin. Pre-construction and 
design work will begin for passing lanes on Highway 7 between 
Rosetown and the Alberta border, and on highways 9 and 10 
between Melville and Canora. And pre-construction and design 
work will begin for passing lanes, widening, and repaving on 
Highway 5 between Highway 2 and Saskatoon. 
 
In addition, this year’s budget provides for 800 kilometres of 
highway improvements across the province. One hundred 
kilometres of rural highways will be upgraded, including 
Highway 4 between Val Marie and Cadillac, Highway 36 
between Highway 18 and Willow Bunch, and Highway 255 
south and west of Tobin Lake. 
 
Seven hundred highway kilometres will be renewed through 
seal coats, microsurfacing, and other types of medium paving, 
as well as 280 kilometres of full repaving on highways such as 
Highway 2 south of Chamberlain, Highway 35 south of 
Weyburn, and Highway 4 north of North Battleford. 
 
This year’s budget provides 330 million for continued work on 
phase 2 of the Regina bypass to be completed in late 2019. 
 
Sixty-one million has been allocated for 30 bridge rehabilitation 
or replacement projects and numerous culvert projects. 
 
This budget also provides 21 million in grants to support 
municipal transportation infrastructure, including 6.7 million to 
urban municipalities such as Prince Albert, Moose Jaw, and 
Melfort, through the urban highway connector program. 
 
This budget also includes more than 123 million in provincial 
support for municipal infrastructure, including nearly 74 million 
for the provincial portion of the New Building Canada Fund 
and 12.5 million for the provincial portion of the Clean Water 
and Wastewater Fund. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Fifteen million to complete our government’s 50 million 
commitment to Saskatoon’s new north commuter parkway 
bridge which will open this fall, improving traffic flow and 
safety in Saskatchewan’s largest city. And 14 million for the 
municipal roads for the economy program. 
 
We’re also continuing to build and upgrade schools with school 
infrastructure investments totalling 76.4 million in this budget, 
including nearly 50 million for preventative maintenance 
renewal and emergency funding which is up almost 15 per cent 
compared to last year. More than 22 million to fund two 
ongoing major school consolidation projects in Rosthern and 
Weyburn, and more than 4 million for relocatable classrooms 
and school facility assessments. 



April 10, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3729 

Also in this budget, we’re continuing to fund the construction 
and maintenance of hospitals and other health facilities. This 
budget provides more than 99 million in health capital funding 
which is up more than 15 million compared to last year. This 
includes 20 million as the final instalment of our government’s 
total 235.5 million construction commitment for the Jim 
Pattison Children’s Hospital. An additional 6.6 million is being 
provided to the children’s hospital for informational technology 
needs. 
 
This budget also provides 34 million to complete construction 
of a unique 284-bed psychiatric care facility, Saskatchewan 
Hospital North Battleford, scheduled to open this fall. The 
hospital replaces a facility that is more than a 100 years old and 
includes secure beds to provide mental health care for people in 
custody, a step forward in breaking the cycle of crime and 
victimization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also provides stable, predictable 
funding for municipalities and nearly a quarter billion dollars in 
municipal revenue sharing, an increase of nearly 90 per cent 
since 2007. This amount is set through an established funding 
formula of one point of the PST collected in 2016-17. Due to 
the recent expansion of the PST base, the one-point municipal 
revenue-sharing formula will be revisited. As announced at the 
recent SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association] and SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] conventions, government officials and our 
government will conduct a thorough review of the current 
municipal revenue-sharing program in consultation with SARM 
and SUMA and other stakeholders. 
 
The government remains committed to provide predictable and 
stable funding to municipalities. In total, this budget provides 
nearly 413 million of direct provincial support to municipalities 
including revenue sharing, infrastructure funding, and other 
community services. Municipal revenue sharing of 241 million 
in this budget remains on track at near-record highs with the 
following allocations: 155 million to urban municipalities, more 
than 68 million to rural municipalities, and 18 million to 
northern municipalities. 
 
Our government continues to support programs and initiatives 
specifically targeted to First Nations and Métis people. The 
2018-19 budget provides about 200 million for targeted 
program funding for First Nations and Métis organizations and 
individuals. Much of this funding is provided for education and 
career-training programs to ensure First Nations and Métis have 
every opportunity to succeed and be full participants in 
Saskatchewan’s growing economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government also remains steadfast in our 
commitment to Saskatchewan’s petroleum and mining 
industries, recognizing that they play a major role in keeping 
our economy strong. This budget will help ensure our energy 
and resource sectors continue to thrive and contribute to 
Saskatchewan’s economic growth. 
 
Major initiatives include 750,000 for a new four-year mineral 
development strategy to create an incentive program to 
encourage mineral exploration and increase the amount of 
available geophysical data. The new strategy will focus on base 
and precious metals and on diamond commodities for which 

there is significant unrealized potential, to help grow and 
diversify Saskatchewan’s mineral sector. The new strategy will 
encourage industry to conduct more exploration in 
Saskatchewan as well as project jobs in our current mining 
centres in the North. A key emphasis will be to encourage base 
metal exploration in Creighton-Denare Beach area which has a 
long history of base metal mining and processing. 
 
In addition, this budget provides 1 million to continue 
enhancement of IRIS, the integrated resource information 
system, for the pipeline regulation enhancement program. IRIS 
is a custom-built, online business system that supports the 
development and regulation of Saskatchewan’s oil and gas 
industry. This continues our government’s commitment 
announced last year for a multi-year program to strengthen 
pipeline regulation in Saskatchewan. With the changes 
announced today, our government is on track to deliver on our 
commitment to significantly improve Saskatchewan’s oil and 
gas regulatory programs. 
 
This budget also creates opportunities for increased trade, 
business investment, and job creation. Our government has the 
highest goods exported per capita of all Canadian provinces. 
STEP, the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership, is 
responsible for increasing Saskatchewan’s exports to existing 
markets and tapping into new markets by initiating sales 
contracts and projects for our exporters. 
 
This budget allocates an additional 250,000 to STEP. This 
funding will go to programs that support the efforts of 
Saskatchewan exporters to increase activities in both new and 
existing markets. This will create jobs and further expand 
Saskatchewan’s access to trade markets around the world. 
 
New business incentives in this budget include the 
Saskatchewan technology start-up initiative, which aims to 
create the conditions for continued rapid growth and success of 
newly emerging technology companies. This incentive bolsters 
our government’s innovation strategy by helping to retain 
technology start-ups in Saskatchewan. This two-year pilot 
program will offer a 45 per cent non-refundable tax credit for 
individuals and corporate equity investments in eligible 
technology start-up businesses, capped at a maximum annual 
benefit of 140,000 per investor. To be eligible, start-ups must be 
early-stage, technology-based companies located in 
Saskatchewan with fewer than 50 employees, and at least half 
of those employees must be located in our province. 
 
Another new business investment in this budget is the 
Saskatchewan value-added agriculture incentive, which will 
improve investment attraction and retention outcomes in our 
province’s value-added agriculture sector. The incentive creates 
a 15 per cent non-refundable tax credit for new or existing 
value-added agriculture facilities that make a minimum capital 
investment of 10 million to expand production capacity. To be 
eligible a product must demonstrate that capital expenditures 
were made for the purpose of creating new productive capacity 
or for increasing existing productive capacity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture continues to be a pillar of 
Saskatchewan’s economy. This budget invests more than 378 
million to help ensure our agriculture sector remains strong. 
This budget includes record investment in agriculture research 



3730 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2018 

of $32 million and more than 258 million to fully fund business 
risk management programs such as crop insurance, 
AgriStability, AgriInvest, and western livestock price insurance. 
 
This budget also provides 3 million to support the irrigation 
sector, as well as increased funding for a new three-year 
funding agreement for Animal Protection Services of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to fostering growth 
and supporting Saskatchewan’s business sector including small 
business and farmers. We are therefore encouraged that the 
federal government’s tax changes affecting small business have 
been modified from their original proposals. Nevertheless the 
impacts that these changes could have on Saskatchewan 
businesses remains unknown. And we will continue to assess 
the changes announced in the recent federal budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2018-19 budget keeps Saskatchewan on track 
by controlling spending, by delivering high-quality programs 
and services for Saskatchewan people, by investing in 
infrastructure, by keeping our economy strong, and by returning 
to balance in 2019-20. 
 
Our government’s vision is to ensure that Saskatchewan is the 
best place in Canada to live, work, to start a business, to get an 
education, to raise a family, and to build a life. Our 2018-19 
budget keeps our government’s plan and our province’s 
finances on track by controlling spending and reducing our 
reliance on volatile, non-renewable resource revenue, while at 
the same time, Mr. Speaker, making important new investments 
in priority areas such as health, education, and social services. 
 
Saskatchewan has enjoyed a decade of growth. This budget sets 
the stage for a new decade of growth by keeping 
Saskatchewan’s finances and our economy on track. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move the motion: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance, 
seconded by the member for Canora-Pelly: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I begin, I do 
want to express my deepest condolences to the Minister of 
Finance, and through her to her community of Humboldt for 
last Friday’s terrible, awful, and horrific tragedy. 
 
Admittedly it’s very difficult to turn our focus to the business at 
hand, but we must. And as we look at the magnitude of this 
challenge, a government that is spending almost $15 billion of 
Saskatchewan people’s money, our job, as opposition, is to sift 
through every penny, Mr. Speaker. What we were looking for in 
this budget, what the people of Saskatchewan were looking for 
was four things: a plan, hope, inspiration, and leadership. And 

sadly, Mr. Speaker, this budget offers none of those. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no plan in this budget. Today’s budget 
should have marked a shift in the way this province moves 
forward into the next decade. This government needed to make 
wise investments in Saskatchewan people to get our province 
back on track. Now this government has titled the budget On 
Track. But, Mr. Speaker, we would like to know, on track to 
where exactly? It’s clearly not to a place that actually serves the 
people of Saskatchewan or to a place that serves the future of 
the entire province and not just the Sask Party’s re-election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party budget is on track all right — on 
track to higher taxes. Saskatchewan people will now be forced 
to pay provincial tax on the purchase of a used car, PST on 
cannabis, and they are taking away tax incentives for people 
who buy energy-efficient appliances. 
 
And Saskatchewan is also on track to post record levels of debt. 
Indeed the reality is Saskatchewan is on track to record levels of 
debt of $20 billion by next year, to be exact. And there’s no 
plan in this budget to get out of debt, only a plan to continue 
seeing it skyrocket. The net debt of Saskatchewan will have 
increased by over 110 per cent since 2007 by the end of this 
year. 
 
Combine that, Mr. Speaker, with the fact that this government 
has mismanaged billions of dollars. They have had record 
revenue, revenues that are unprecedented in the history of 
Saskatchewan. And no other government in the history of our 
province has ever enjoyed the types of revenues that the Sask 
Party has enjoyed for the last decade, Mr. Speaker. And yet 
they’ve spent all that money, Mr. Speaker, and they’ve added 
billions to our debt. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Budgets are about choices, and there are a lot of choices to be 
made here in Saskatchewan in this budget. The people of 
Saskatchewan were looking to this government and this new 
Premier for a plan, Mr. Speaker, a plan for getting 
Saskatchewan out of record-breaking debt, a plan for 
investment and creating good jobs, a plan for growing the 
economy, a plan for building our collective future, Mr. Speaker. 
And there is no such plan. 
 
Something else this budget is lacking is hope. In the past two 
years Saskatchewan families have experienced a nearly 60 per 
cent increase in what they pay for sales taxes. They’re paying 
more for their utilities to light and heat their homes. Since 2012 
SaskPower has increased their rates by over 30 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. Bankruptcies are on the rise in Saskatchewan, and 
mortgage arrears are three times higher than the national 
average. 
 
What people were hoping for in today’s budget was something 
that showed them this government recognizes that the cost of 
living has gone up in a big way for far too many. They look to 
their power bills, Mr. Speaker, which are covering for the 
mismanagement and waste of this government. This budget 
doesn’t go any distance to make life more affordable, and in 
many areas it actually makes it more expensive. Mr. Speaker, 
once again this government refuses to recognize the reality of 



April 10, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3731 

the Sask Party’s cuts and mismanagement that has families 
paying more. 
 
Now we had hoped . . . We had some hope this year that they 
might make the right decisions. Last year the Sask Party hiked 
the PST by nearly a billion dollars. They raised education 
property taxes, and their cuts to municipalities have meant that 
many across the province have seen huge hikes in their property 
taxes. And they hiked fees on everything, right down to apple 
juice boxes. So the people of Saskatchewan had hoped that they 
would see change. 
 
Now I stood with our leader last week and spoke about some of 
that hope, hope for Saskatchewan’s future, for our kids’ future, 
for their education both today and tomorrow. But this budget is 
once again cutting money to schools. They’re refusing to meet 
the growing needs of students and are actually cutting funding 
to education. Now this Education minister said today that 
“Education provides children with the foundation they need to 
pursue their dreams and achieve their full potential.” Mr. 
Speaker, I could not agree with that minister more. But that 
statement then begs the question: why would a minister make 
and defend cuts to programs designed to help children achieve 
their full potential? There’s literally a cut in a line item in 
education called “achievement,” Mr. Speaker, and another one 
entitled “kindergarten to grade 12 initiatives.” How cutting 
funding to those areas translates to a foundation kids need to 
pursue their dreams is a question the people of Saskatchewan 
will be wondering for some time. 
 
There’s little hope offered in this budget for post-secondary 
students in Saskatchewan as well. They are cutting those 
students’ supports, slashing operational support for 
post-secondary students, including cuts to the Saskatchewan 
Student Aid Fund and of course the cut to the Saskatchewan 
advantage grant for education savings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what hope is this government offering our 
hometowns? Well funding is once again down across the 
province for cities and towns, and municipalities are being 
called on to further tax Saskatchewan people to make up for 
what the province has taken away. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, once again, despite the year that we’ve had 
in this province, despite the tragedies in the North and the 
struggles in communities across the province, despite the 
lingering education funding gap for First Nations children and 
despite an unacceptably high First Nations unemployment rate, 
there is nothing in this budget to help us move forward on the 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s calls to action and this 
province’s necessary role in reconciliation. They brag about 
their accomplishments here, Mr. Speaker, but there are no new 
training opportunities for First Nations and Métis people, just 
cuts. 
 
Seniors were looking for hope today, Mr. Speaker. They are not 
even mentioned in the budget. And so many of them have told 
me they just can’t make ends meet, especially for those on fixed 
incomes. I’ll never forget one elderly lady telling me that at 
times for her it was a choice between food or medicine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the credibility of a budget can be judged against a 
number of basic principles, including its basis on a realistic and 

balanced assessment of economic prospects, challenges, and 
risks. The truth is that this government has not done that 
assessment, and while we hoped that they would change, they 
have not. They’re still driving us deeper into debt, putting our 
Crowns deeper into debt and at risk and, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
putting our future deeper in debt. That is not hope. 
 
We also looked for but did not find any inspiration in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker: inspiration for entrepreneurship; 
inspiration for innovation; inspiration for creativity; inspiration 
for bright young minds. The addition of so-called incentives in 
areas like value-added agriculture and for start-up businesses 
are all good and fine, Mr. Speaker. However there is no money 
in this budget for research and development, for renewable 
energy, and renewable resources. Zero. 
 
Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan people want to see this 
province champion renewable resources in so many ways. They 
want access to them. They want a hand in creating them and 
they want the jobs that come along with them. This government 
had an opportunity to inspire today’s and next generations of 
inventors and entrepreneurs but they’ve missed it. The fact is 
the road to green technology as both an environmental 
safeguard and an economic driver is indeed on track all over the 
world except here. This government has missed that train 
entirely. 
 
Now what they did include, Mr. Speaker, which perhaps speaks 
to this government’s notion of inspiration but I would venture 
no one else’s, are confusing, ill-conceived, and overly complex 
new programs, programs which will impact a very limited 
number of applicants. From here they appear to be another 
attempt by this government to do something it swore it would 
never do: pick winners and losers. Today, Mr. Speaker, I 
venture, inspiration in this budget is in very short supply 
indeed. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan were looking to this government and to the 
Premier for leadership in this budget. What they got was not 
leadership. Leadership is not bragging about the highest-ever 
social services expenditures in Saskatchewan history, Mr. 
Speaker. What that tells us is that more and more people are 
living in poverty. Rural crime is a serious issue in this province, 
and issues like addictions, poverty, and mental health, which 
have been neglected by the Sask Party government for so long, 
are making the situation worse. 
 
The Premier and his government are boasting about health 
spending going up, but we know it’s because more people are 
sick and needing care. And what we don’t see is more 
caregivers on the front lines. And for mental health specifically, 
this government’s commitment falls short on what so many 
people have been calling for, for far too long. 
 
Now they talk big, but I wish they had been more interested in 
their dependency on natural resources revenue when we still 
had the rainy day fund established by the previous NDP [New 
Democratic Party] government. The Growth and Financial 
Security Fund is now empty, and the Act has been scrapped 
altogether. I think we could use a bit of financial security right 
about now, Mr. Speaker. 
 



3732 Saskatchewan Hansard April 10, 2018 

It’s interesting that many members opposite find that humorous, 
Mr. Speaker, because resource revenues are now lower. That’s 
when we should have savings in the financial security fund — 
security for the people of this province, security of knowing that 
this government has ensured that as this province grows, their 
services such as health care and education will keep up. And, 
Mr. Speaker, this shows lack of leadership. 
 
The Sask Party has run deficits not one, not two, but three years 
in a row. And despite what this government boasted as a surplus 
in their GRF [General Revenue Fund], there were actually 
deficits in 2010, 2011, and 2012. Despite what they have tried 
to convince us, Mr. Speaker, seven of the last 10 budgets from 
this government have been deficit budgets, and debt, Mr. 
Speaker, debt is exploding. 
 
Leadership goes hand in hand with transparency. And they 
need, Mr. Speaker, as math teachers often tell their students, to 
show their work. Instead of saying, just trust us, Mr. Speaker, 
this government has pushed the Saskatchewan people’s trust to 
the limit. Mr. Speaker, when you dig just a little and see the 
many cuts in this Estimates book, you see how important that 
accountability and transparency is in a budget written by this 
Sask Party government. 
 
With no plan, no hope, no inspiration, and no leadership, there’s 
no doubt that our future’s not on track. It is being parked on a 
rail siding. 
 
Over the next few days, our leader and the members of the loyal 
opposition will continue this budget debate. We will continue to 
shine light on these poor decisions of this Sask Party 
government and on how Saskatchewan families are paying 
more and they’re getting less and how this budget offers more 
of the same, offering no inspiration or leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people deserve better. And so I will 
conclude my remarks for today, and I now move that this 
debate be adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Nutana has moved 
adjournment of debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 

Resumption of Budget Debate 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I move: 
 

That debate on the motion “That the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government” be 
resumed on Wednesday, April 11th, 2018. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader: 
 

That debate on the motion “That the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government” be 
resumed on Wednesday, April 11th, 2018. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Assembly 
do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before I place the question on adjournment, 
first of all I want to thank everybody, all the guests that have 
joined us today, for your co-operation in observing the rules of 
the Assembly. This actually might be . . . You might be the best 
budgetary audience ever. 
 
And now I’d like to extend an invitation to our guests to join the 
members for tea in the Legislative Library, to your right as you 
leave the Assembly, and to room 218, which is on your left. 
 
At this time I will place the question. The Government House 
Leader has moved that this House do now adjourn. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. Thank you. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:27.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3725 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3725 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3730 
 Resumption of Budget Debate 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3732 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


