


















































April 24, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 47A  TUESDAY, APRIL 24, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3997 
 April 24, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave to make a 
statement with respect to the incident in Toronto yesterday. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave to make a 
personal statement. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Premier. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Support and Condolences for Toronto 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, over the last few weeks we 
have seen a tremendous outpouring of generosity and 
compassion for the victims of a terrible accident involving our 
Humboldt Broncos. The entire nation has rallied for Humboldt, 
and they have rallied for our province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, in our nation of Canada there is 
another community in anguish. There is another community in 
Canada that desperately needs our love and support here today, 
Mr. Speaker. Today the great city of Toronto is in shock 
following a brutal, indiscriminate attack that took place on a 
busy street on a bright, sunny day. Mr. Speaker, 10 people died 
yesterday; 15 people were injured. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I plan to speak to Premier Kathleen Wynne later 
this afternoon to offer the complete support of Saskatchewan as 
Toronto deals with this tragedy. Our hearts go out to the 
families who lost loved ones in this attack. We offer them our 
prayers and we offer them our deepest condolences, knowing 
that whatever we can provide is inadequate, given the enormity 
of their loss. We pray for the injured and their families 
watching over them. 
 
We are thinking of those who responded to this tragedy: the 
police, particularly the courageous officer who arrested the man 
that apparently carried out the attack; the EMTs [emergency 
medical technician]; the paramedics; the medical teams; the 
trauma counsellors who will be busy, as we know, in the days 
ahead. The response has been heroic, and we are grateful for the 
bravery, compassion, and professionalism of all of those 
involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the circumstances of this incident are horrifying. 
The attack was so senseless. The attack was so sudden. And 
once again, it is not difficult to put ourselves in the place of 
those victims. In Saskatchewan it might be easier, given what 
we’ve been through this past month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our darkest hour, Toronto and Ontario came to 
our aid. You can see the names on the Humboldt Broncos 
GoFundMe page — the Rotherglen School in Oakville, The 
Mississauga Terriers Hockey Club, the Billy Bishop Airport in 

Toronto — just three donations, Mr. Speaker, among so many. 
Mr. Speaker, there can be no doubt that Toronto stands with 
Saskatchewan these last few weeks. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is our turn. It’s our turn for Saskatchewan 
to stand with Toronto in their time of need. We must send an 
urgent message to Canada’s largest city. Mr. Speaker, today 
Saskatchewan is Toronto strong. We honour those who died. 
We pray for their families. We honour those who were injured, 
and we pray for their speedy and full recovery. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 
Premier in offering my words of condolence on behalf of our 
caucus to those who were injured in the attack in Toronto, to the 
families of those who were killed. 
 
You know, my brother lives in Toronto with his family. I think 
it’s unlikely that any of us doesn’t have some friend or family 
members who’s been there. When you have an incident like this 
of this indiscriminate and senseless violence, it hits so close to 
home. You just can’t help but imagine, what if those were your 
family members? And we think about the families of those 
who’ve been affected today. We offer our sincere condolences 
to them and to everyone in Toronto and Ontario as they’re 
dealing with the reality that this happened at home. 
 
And once again — and it’s awful to have to be doing this again 
— but once again we are proud to thank the law enforcement 
officers, the first responders, those people whose work we don’t 
want to be using, but we’re so glad that they’re there when 
they’re needed, and thank them for their bravery, their 
dedication, and join the Premier in offering our strength and 
support to the people of Toronto in this difficult moment. 
 
The Speaker: — I ask the Assembly to all rise for a moment of 
silence. 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Pursuant to section 39 of The Advocate for 
Children and Youth Act, I’ll be tabling the Advocate for 
Children and Youth’s annual report 2017. That’ll be tabled. 
Thanks. 
 
I recognize the Minister for Energy and Resources. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to ask leave 
to make a personal statement. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister for Energy and Resources has 
asked for leave to issue a personal statement. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 



3998 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2018 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Release of Embargoed Information 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday an embargoed news release was sent to members of 
the media with respect to Bill 126, The Energy Export Act 
approximately 45 minutes before the House was sitting. This 
was an inadvertent mistake and in no way was there any intent 
to breach the privilege of this Assembly. I wish to apologize for 
this error, Mr. Speaker, and would like to ensure all members of 
the Assembly that every action will be undertaken to ensure that 
this will not happen again. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask leave for an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has asked leave for an extended 
introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, thank you to this Assembly for 
granting leave. And it’s a great pleasure, brings me great 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to this Assembly, 
some constituents of mine and some constituents from the 
constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers, the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers who, I believe, will follow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with us today are Janelle and Camille Harris, Mr. 
Speaker. Janelle is from Canwood, used to be a neighbour of 
mine, a next-door neighbour of mine not too long ago, Mr. 
Speaker, and Camille lives in Shellbrook. And they’re 
accompanied today by their uncle Carmen who hails from the 
Briarlea area, Mr. Speaker, and Carmen’s daughter Twyla 
Harris Naciri, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the Harris family are long-time and 
active supporters of organ donation awareness in our province 
of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they’re in Regina today 
attending events held as part of National Organ and Tissue 
Donation Awareness Week. Every year the Harris family holds 
a special event to support this very worthy cause, Mr. Speaker. 
And if you know the Harris family at all, it will come as no 
surprise that its Shoot for the Vitals 3-D [three-dimensional] 
archery shoot is this cause, Mr. Speaker, a fundraiser that takes 
place — and is in its fifth annual year — this June 23rd and 
24th, Mr. Speaker. It’ll be at a location just west of Prince 
Albert near Crutwell on Highway 55. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Harris family organized the archery shoot to 
raise awareness and also honour family members who have 
passed while waiting for organ donations, Mr. Speaker, as well 

as, I think, to honour a current family member that is waiting 
for an organ donation, Mr. Speaker: Mr. Ralph Harris, who 
again lives in the community of Shellbrook. And I know him as 
Skippy as we used to play hockey together a number of years 
ago, quite a few years ago, and was active in the baseball league 
in the community as well, Mr. Speaker. And his kids remain 
active in sports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can understand anyone can take part in the 
archery shoot, including children. Those who can’t attend can 
support the cause by making a donation, by sponsoring an 
archery target, or by donating a prize to the raffle. And I’d like 
to commend the Harris family at this point in time for their 
compassion for their family members, their compassion for 
Saskatchewan residents, and their leadership. 
 
In Saskatchewan we need to do more to raise awareness about 
organ and tissue donations, Mr. Speaker, and we will continue 
to do that. And that’s why on Monday the Saskatchewan Health 
Authority announced a new model that will help boost donation 
rates in our province. Physicians have been contracted, Mr. 
Speaker, to serve as champions of the organ and tissue 
donations within our health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join me in welcoming 
our guests to their legislature here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the Premier in welcoming these guests today: Carmen, 
Janelle, and Camille Harris and Twyla Harris Naciri. Twyla 
I’ve have the privilege of knowing for many years now, Mr. 
Speaker . . . Oh, I’m still not better, Mr. Speaker. I’m getting 
there, though. It’s been a bit of a slog here. 
 
I’ve had the pleasure of knowing Twyla for several years now 
but got to meet some of the rest of the Harris family actually 
when they presented at the organ donation Human Services 
Committee to talk about their own experiences and what they 
felt and thought the province should be doing. They’re strong 
advocates for improving organ and tissue donation rates. They 
really put their heart into it all, and I’ll have an opportunity in a 
member’s statement to just comment on some of their work as 
well. But I’d ask all members to welcome the Harris and the 
Harris Naciri family here today. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to 
welcome the folks from Women in the Legislature. They’re a 
group of women from the University of Saskatchewan who’ve 
come for several years in a row here to hear from both sides of 
the House and from civil servants, to learn a little bit more 
about politics, about women in politics, but also women in the 
civil service and how they might fit. But just generally trying to 
improve their knowledge base. 
 
I have to say, and I’ve said this in the past, this is one of my 
favourite things to do as an MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] is to connect with this group. It’s always a great 
opportunity to share our experiences as a caucus. I know the 
other side of the House had an opportunity to do that too and 
hear the smart and engaging questions that these folks have, and 



April 24, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3999 

we always appreciate their time. With that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to ask the Assembly to welcome the Women in the Legislature 
group from the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you 
and to you and members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce Carmen Harris of the Briarlea area. Now Carmen is a 
fellow 4-H leader and a passionate community advocate, and 
he’s here today for the National Organ and Tissue Donation 
Awareness Week. I believe at least three of your family 
members are recipients and organ donation has played a very 
large part in your life since 1992. So please help me in 
welcoming Carmen and his family to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join in with 
the Premier and the members in welcoming the Harris family 
today, specifically . . . So I had the opportunity to have lunch 
with all of them prior to this, and so I want to thank them for 
their time here and thank them for that enjoyable experience. 
 
In particular, I would like to welcome Carmen Harris, who I’ve 
had the opportunity to get to know quite a bit over the years. I 
know him to be a caring and dutiful father and grandfather and 
just a terrific man, and also a great source for Wheat Pool 
paraphernalia, although he might not like me admitting that to 
such a large forum. More people will be knocking down his 
door. So I’d like to welcome you to your Assembly. 
 
I would also like to welcome Twyla Harris Naciri here today, 
and Twyla and I have known each other for — I was just trying 
to do the math — I think it’s about 12 years. We worked 
together in the cadet program. I was involved in helping 
convince her to put a uniform on and I think it was an okay 
decision. So we go back quite a ways, Mr. Speaker, and I have 
had the opportunity to see her work on a number of different 
avenues, including her advocacy in organ donation. 
 
[13:45] 
 
At present she serves as my constituency assistant in Saskatoon 
Fairview, so I also want to thank her for the hard work that she 
does every day. It can be a lonely job when you’re the only 
person in the office and you’re there to be the kind and 
compassionate and patient ear, and I want to thank her for all 
the work that she does in that capacity as well, and ask that all 
members join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to join with the member opposite in 
welcoming the young ladies that we have here from Women in 
the Legislature from the U of S. This is a trek that they make 
every year, and it started actually even long before I got elected, 
and I believe the member from Regina Rochdale was involved 
in that. But also when I was involved with Equal Voice, I had 

the opportunity to connect with this group. 
 
I met with them this morning, along with my colleagues, the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers and the member from 
Lloydminster. We had a wonderful conversation, and I’m very 
pleased to see you here. There’s never been a better time to be a 
woman, particularly a woman who aspires to positions of 
leadership, and who will get . . . We’re going to be warming up 
some spots for you right over here. 
 
So on behalf of my colleagues, I’d like to just welcome you to 
the Legislative Assembly. I’d like to welcome you to the 
Legislative Assembly, and if you could just give a quick wave, 
I’ll just quickly read out some of the names: Mackenzie 
Stewart, this is her second or even third year here; Lukaa 
Jasem; Blake Tait; Deena Kapacila; Sabryna McCrea; Keonie 
Green; Olga Ifaka; Saleha Shahid; Darcia Roache; Deanna 
Black; Dalia Alazawi; Anwyn Huber-Stevenson; Santana 
Thomas-Dreaver; Monica Iron; Elizabeth McKay; April Elder; 
Preet Shoker; Irteqa Khan; Lauren Klassen; Katherine Raes; 
Farwa Wajahat; Romaisa Ismaeel; and Soudabeh Taghian 
Dinani. There, I think I did it okay. Please join me in 
welcoming these lovely young ladies to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
gives me great pleasure and honour to recognize the very 
esteemed colleague in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, the member 
that served here for many years, Mr. Ron Osika. As we all 
know, Ron is the former Speaker. He is also a former MLA. He 
is also a former mayor. He is also a former minister, a former 
police officer, but not a former friend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Osika continues being a great inspiration to 
myself personally and to other members of the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] caucus and to people all throughout the 
Qu’Appelle Valley area. And I want to say to the Assembly 
today, it’s a great honour to have Mr. Osika here again grace 
these halls and, as we all know, he served very honourably and 
he worked very hard for the people of Saskatchewan. And I 
want to take this opportunity to ask all members of the 
Assembly to recognize a colleague, a dear friend, and a great 
mentor, Mr. Ron Osika. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I’d like to also join 
the opposition and welcome Mr. Osika to his gallery. He’s 
sitting behind the clock, and I can’t see him. And not very often 
do I trust the opposition with what they say, but now, now I get 
a glance, and yes, he is there. I needed to have visual 
confirmation, especially when that member is speaking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank Mr. Osika for the years 
of service that he gave this province in his previous career in 
the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police], this province as a 
sitting MLA and a cabinet minister and a member that sat in 
your chair. Mr. Speaker, the first Speaker that I had any 
experience with and was very fair at that time, and then most 
recently as the mayor of Fort Qu’Appelle. I think he’s finally, I 



4000 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2018 

think he’s finally enjoying some retirement but, Mr. Speaker, 
on behalf of the government, thank Ron for all his service to 
this province on the many capacities that he had served. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 
to briefly join with the member from Athabasca, the member 
from Indian Head to welcome Ron Osika, a rock-solid person 
within this province who has served our province and people 
his entire life, and somebody that I’m awfully lucky to count as 
a friend and mentor as well, someone that it’s always so 
enjoyable to sit down with him and Barb. So I welcome Ron to 
his Assembly. 
 
But while on my feet, I would like to welcome and introduce 
two friends that are seated in the east gallery, Mr. Speaker, Dan 
Woloshin and Taylor Apperley. Both of these young leaders 
have served as the president of the Saskatchewan Young New 
Democrats at various times. 
 
Taylor is an exceptional person, a young education student. I 
believe she just finished her internship over at F.W. Johnson. I 
think Johnson might be here today as well in the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a pleasure to have her here today. 
 
And it’s a pleasure to have Dan Woloshin here in his Assembly. 
This is a young leader in so many ways, a bright mind on 
policy, somebody who gives back to his community, and a law 
student at the University of Saskatchewan. So I ask all members 
to join with me in welcoming Taylor Apperley and Dan 
Woloshin to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. In the west 
gallery this afternoon we have a group of 14 grade 10 students 
from the aforementioned F.W. Johnson Collegiate. And once 
again their teacher, Scott McKillop, has brought them down to 
watch some democracy in action. I will have a meeting with 
them after routine proceedings. I ask all members to help me 
welcome them here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d also like to join with the members in 
welcoming Mr. Ron Osika to his legislature. Maybe sometime 
we can have an opportunity to sit and have a chat just about 
how you instilled order. But it’s a work in progress. We got our 
individual pieces, but we’ll go from there . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes. I think we’re done. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from the citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on our 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Porcupine. 
I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
calling on the Legislative Assembly to stop the Sask Party 
attack on our kids’ already strained classrooms. Those who’ve 
signed this petition wish to draw our attention to the following 
points: that the Sask Party cut $54 million from our kids’ 
classrooms in the devastating 2017-18 budget; that the 2018-19 
budget only restores a fraction of last year’s devastating $54 
million cut to classrooms, even though costs continue to rise; 
and even though the Sask Party is making us all pay more, our 
kids are actually getting less. The Sask Party cuts mean that 
students will lose much needed supports in their classroom, 
including funding for buses for kindergartners and programs to 
help children with special needs. 
 
I’ll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the government to fully restore the senseless cuts to our 
kids’ classrooms and stop making families, teachers, and 
everyone who works to support our education system pay 
the price for the Sask Party’s mismanagement. 
 

Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
White City and Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member of Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition calling to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. 
And the undersigned residents of Saskatchewan want to bring to 
our attention the following: that Saskatchewan’s outdated 
election Act allows corporations, unions, and individuals, even 
those outside the province, to make unlimited donations to our 
province’s political parties. And we know that the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve to live in a fair province where all voices 
are equal and money can’t influence politics. 
 
We also know though that over the past 10 years, the 
Saskatchewan Party has received $12.61 million in corporate 
donations and, of that, 2.87 million came from companies 
outside Saskatchewan. You know, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
politics should belong to Saskatchewan people, and we know 
that the federal government and the provinces of Alberta, 
Manitoba, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and now British Columbia 
have moved to limit this influence and level the playing field by 
banning corporate and union donations to political parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 



April 24, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4001 

that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign finance laws, 
to end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 
from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 
on individual donations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical workplace supports for 
survivors of domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has 
the dubious distinction of having the highest rates of intimate 
partner violence amongst all of the provinces, and we all know 
that we must do so much more to protect survivors of domestic 
violence. 
 
For those who are experiencing domestic violence, that violence 
will often follow them to their workplaces. And that’s why the 
signatories to this petition are calling for five days of paid leave 
and up to 17 weeks of unpaid leave be made available to 
workers who are survivors of domestic violence, and that 
critical workplace supports be made available to survivors of 
domestic violence and also available to workers living with 
post-traumatic stress disorder as a result of that domestic 
violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what we’re calling for in our private 
member’s bill, Bill No. 609. This is the fourth time we’ve 
tabled those provisions in bill form in front of this House in the 
last two years, Mr. Speaker. The studies that show . . . PATHS 
[Provincial Association of Transition Houses and Services of 
Saskatchewan] has done a very extensive study on this issue 
and found that the cost that these provisions would have on 
employers is extremely minimal, especially when you consider 
the turnover rate that employers will experience from those who 
are experiencing domestic violence, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 
why we are joining with these signatories and calling for the 
government to finally do the right thing and pass these 
provisions into law. 
 
Let me read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to pass legislation to ensure 
critical supports in the workplace, including reasonable 
accommodation and paid and unpaid leave for survivors of 
domestic violence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatories to this petition today come from 
Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
to present a petition today calling on the Sask Party government 
to lead with a pharmacare program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The petitioners point out that in Canada we’re the only country 

with a universal health care system that does not include 
prescription drug coverage, and that this oversight results in 
unnecessary illness and suffering and costs us billions of 
dollars. They point out that over 90 per cent of Canadians agree 
that we need a national pharmacare program, which makes 
sense, as one in five Canadians don’t fill necessary 
prescriptions because the medications cost too much. And they 
point out that when we cover essential medications we improve 
people’s quality of life and save millions in downstream costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to immediately support the 
establishment of universal pharmacare for Saskatchewan 
patients and advocate for national pharmacare for all 
Canadians. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon 
today. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 

National Organ and Tissue Donation Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week is National 
Organ and Tissue Donation Awareness week. For me it hits 
close to home as my son, Percy, was given a gift when he was 
12 years old and received an organ transplant. He’s now 25 and 
will have a successful career in dentistry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province continues to grieve after April 6th; 
however this tragedy has sparked thousands of conversations 
about organ donation in Saskatchewan. Though we are still 
hurting, we see our communities rising in support, signing 
donor cards, and raising awareness for this important decision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to announce that an investment of 
$566,000 has been allocated in 2018-19 for the Saskatchewan 
Health Authority to establish a leadership model for organ and 
tissue donation. The investment also reflects four 
Saskatoon-based physicians that have signed contracts to share 
a half-time position to provide leadership and education as 
donor physicians across the health system. 
 
In addition, we have launched a public awareness campaign, 
highlighting powerful real-life experiences of Saskatchewan 
families. Mr. Speaker, in support of my son, I was involved in 
the initiation of the Transplant Trot in Lloydminster, an annual 
event that celebrates life after transplant, raises awareness, and 
encourages citizens to become donors. 
 
This week I encourage everyone in this Assembly to remember 
the remarkable lives of our donors, like Logan Boulet from the 
Humboldt hockey team, and thank them for their gift of life that 
has impacted so many families. Thank you. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon 



4002 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2018 

Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week, April 
22nd to 28th, is National Organ and Tissue Donation 
Awareness Week. Across Canada people are raising awareness 
about the critical need for more donors. Approximately 4,500 
Canadians are waiting for a life-saving organ transplant, and the 
sad reality is that on average 250 Canadians die each year 
waiting for one. 
 
In 2015 Saskatchewan had the lowest rates among provinces for 
organ donation from deceased donors. We heard yesterday that 
the government has created half of one donation physician 
position and a public awareness campaign — a welcome start, 
but there’s still so much the government should be doing to 
raise donation rates here. 
 
One family that is doing its part when it comes to supporting 
organ and tissue donation is the Harris family. This will be the 
fifth year for a fundraiser they founded called Shoot for the 
Vitals. It’s a 3-D archery shoot happening June 23rd and 24th to 
support members of the Shellbrook and Prince Albert 
communities who have gone through or are going through 
donation. 
 
This issue hits close to home for them, as the Harrises have lost 
three family members who required organ and tissue donations, 
and they know too well the pain and hardships that families go 
through during this time. Their hope is that their event raises 
awareness around organ and tissue donation, breaks down 
stigma, and provides support to those who need it. Over the 
years they have raised over $6,000 for community members. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking the Harris family on 
their leadership and commitment when it comes to organ and 
tissue donation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Recognizing Volunteer Firefighters 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, this past Saturday April 21st, I 
had the honour of attending the volunteer firefighters banquet at 
the Evergreen Centre in Nipawin. Each year there are two 
firefighter training courses held in our province: one in the 
North, and one in the South. Nipawin is host for this year. Mr. 
Speaker, over 380 firefighters attended this year’s fire school, 
all of them from our small towns and rural communities. The 
training and education they receive at this is vital to their safety 
and success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was a volunteer myself for 25 years, and I 
certainly appreciate the time and effort all the firefighters 
dedicate to this service. The important role of volunteer 
firefighters in our communities was highlighted at the recent 
Humboldt Broncos bus accident. Volunteers from Nipawin, 
Melfort, Tisdale, Zenon Park, and Carrot River were all on hand 
to assist at this devastating accident. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our volunteer firefighters are an integral part of 
our communities, providing us with protection and safety 
whenever we need it. I would like to express my gratitude to 

each and every one of these volunteers. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to ask everyone to join me in recognizing all of our 
volunteer firefighters in our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Community Leaders Attend United Nations Session 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my honour to stand 
and recognize Patricia Thomson and Kendra Strong-Garcia, two 
community leaders who recently had the opportunity to travel to 
New York City for the 62nd session of the United Nations 
Commission on the Status of Women. The focus of the UN 
[United Nations] session was Challenges and Opportunities in 
Achieving Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Rural 
Women and Girls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these two inspiring Saskatchewan women 
represented our province in a panel discussion where they had 
an opportunity to discuss issues impacting their communities. 
Kendra Strong-Garcia is from Regina, is the senior director of 
programs for Regina’s YWCA [Young Women’s Christian 
Association], and I’m proud to count her as a good friend. She 
said the opportunity has motivated her to think bigger and said 
it was impactful being among so many powerful women 
leaders. 
 
Patricia Thomson is the executive director for the Cowessess 
First Nation. She valued the opportunity to empower indigenous 
women and share how her connection to her traditional culture 
has helped her become the leader that she is today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t be more proud of the contributions of 
these two women within our province and on the world stage. I 
ask all members to join with me in recognizing and thanking 
Patricia Thomson and Kendra Strong-Garcia for their incredible 
work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 

4-H Public Speaking Competition 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this month 
young speakers from all corners of Saskatchewan came 
together. They came together to compete in the 2018 Provincial 
4-H Public Speaking Competition held in Melville. This event 
gives members a chance to learn public speaking skills from a 
young age. Competitors are divided into four groups: 
Cloverbud, age 6 to 8; Junior, 9 to 12; Intermediate, from 13 to 
15; and Senior, from ages 16 to 21. Each participant shares a 
persuasive, informative, or entertaining speech on the topic of 
their choice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can say from experience that this is a unique and 
worthwhile opportunity for anyone who participates. My 
daughter participated in this event last year. And as members of 
this Assembly can attest, public speaking can be incredibly 
difficult and I, along with MLAs on this side of the House, were 
first introduced to public speaking through 4-H. 
 
I would like to congratulate this year’s winners: for Cloverbuds, 
Sunny Cooper; for Junior, Tyson Code; for Intermediate, 
Hunter Reid; and for Senior, Morgan Heidecker. 



April 24, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4003 

Mr. Speaker, public speaking is an important skill, and 
competitions like this can help these young competitors build 
self-confidence and communication skills. On behalf of this 
entire Assembly, I’d like to thank 4-H Saskatchewan, the event 
committee, and all volunteers for making this event possible. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Invitational Basketball Tournament 
 
Mr. Goudy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Lots of fun was had at 
the first annual Filipino North East Invitational Tournament in 
Melfort this weekend. Four teams participated, including teams 
from Melfort, St. Brieux, Humboldt, as well as our stacked 
team of MLAs, which included the members from Melfort, 
Lloydminster, and Saskatoon University. 
 
Our MLA team picked up some players from the crowd, and 
though we did hit our stride eventually, it was a bit too late, Mr. 
Speaker. The member from Lloydminster refereed a few games 
and played very well, but most of all was notable for her 
familiarity with the moves required to Zumba. Though the 
MLA from Saskatoon University said he hadn’t played 
basketball since grade 9, he scored a hat trick thanks to his 
lucky bright red Montreal Canadiens sneakers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Filipino community in my constituency is very 
strong, and the atmosphere at the event was phenomenal. There 
are more than 100 Filipino families living in Melfort now, while 
hundreds more call St. Brieux and Humboldt their home. 
They’ve been a huge benefit to our community, and we 
appreciate their strong focus on family values. I am privileged 
to be a part of their lives and represent them here in our 
legislature. 
 
Good basketball, family games, Zumba, and too much food 
were ingredients for a great day, Mr. Speaker. Humboldt ended 
up taking home the trophy, but our MLA team will be stronger 
next year. With a few practices, a little luck, and a 
hand-selected referee, I’m hopeful that we’ll bring the trophy 
home to the Legislative Building. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 

Doctor of Philosophy Graduate Develops Valuable Tool 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d 
like to acknowledge the academic achievements of a member 
from my constituency. Lindsay Goodwin is a researcher and a 
recent Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] graduate in physics from 
the University of Saskatchewan. She has developed a tool that 
will help predict and possibly prevent negative impacts of space 
weather.  
 
Lindsay’s tool is a new way to measure the impact of solar 
activity in the ionosphere, the upper part of the atmosphere, as 
indicated by the northern lights and geomagnetic storms. More 
simply put, Mr. Speaker, Lindsay has said that her work will 
help ensure that all community’s infrastructure that we rely on 
every day, such as satellites, sustaining banking transactions, 
TV signals, and the Internet will keep working properly. Yes, 
Mr. Speaker, your Netflix will continue to stream. 

Major agencies across the world have invested in her project, 
including the Canada Research Chairs program, the Canada 
Foundation for Innovation, the federal agency NSERC [Natural 
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada], the 
Canadian Space Agency, the European Space Agency, and the 
US [United States] National Science Foundation. 
 
Lindsay said that she has always been obsessed with galaxies 
and deep space but realized there is lots of learning to be done 
right here on our own planet. Lindsay will soon be working at 
Boston University, collaborating with Stanford Research 
Institute and MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] to 
advance her research. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate 
Lindsay on her achievements and wish her all the success in the 
future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Former Member and Irrigation Project Approval Process 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier said last week that Mr. Boyd was treated in precisely 
the same manner that anyone would be treated. And yet the 
deputy ministers of Environment and Agriculture said on 
Thursday that they, and the former deputy minister of the 
Premier, stepped in on this matter in early June — two months 
before any charges were laid — because the infractions they’d 
found involved a high-profile individual. 
 
So I do wonder which it is, Mr. Speaker. Does the Premier still 
maintain that Mr. Boyd received no special treatment for his 
application or addressing his violations? Or was he treated 
differently, as the officials stated, because he’s a high-profile 
individual? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, this was a high-profile 
individual, Mr. Speaker, with what appeared to be a serious 
offence in a very sensitive area of the province, Mr. Speaker, on 
the shores of the South Saskatchewan. 
 
But the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker — and the people of 
the province can be reassured of this — is that the process that 
we have in place worked, and it worked regardless of who the 
individual was that had performed the infraction, Mr. Speaker. 
This individual was charged under our environmental 
protections laws, Mr. Speaker. This individual received one of 
the largest fines ever put out, Mr. Speaker, with respect to our 
environmental laws here in the province, Mr. Speaker. The 
individual was required to remediate the site, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of the province can rest assured that the 
process works, and the process works regardless of who you are 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier rightly 
points out that Mr. Boyd did receive those fines. He also 
received the permits even while this process was still under 



4004 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2018 

way, Mr. Speaker, which is what seems particularly strange. 
 
The Premier has confirmed that he attended a high-level 
meeting between the deputy minister to the Premier, ministries 
of Agriculture and Environment on June 5th to discuss Bill 
Boyd’s irrigation project and determine how to address what he 
again described as a serious infraction in a sensitive area on the 
shores of the South Saskatchewan. 
 
The Premier said that at this meeting he was informed that there 
would be an investigation. And he added that he made one 
suggestion, one comment at that meeting. He said it would be 
worthwhile to have an experienced investigator. 
 
So I wonder, Mr. Speaker, did that happen? Who conducted that 
investigation? And when did it begin? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, first and foremost I would just point out the 
contradiction in the member opposite, the Leader of the 
Opposition’s own question, when he raises the fact that, as had 
been indicated, the deputy ministers informed the ministers 
when there was an infraction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the member opposite also, last week out in the rotunda, 
indicated that hadn’t the ministers been . . . not been made 
aware of this, that they apparently, in his words, would not be 
doing their jobs. So I’m not sure which is it, Mr. Speaker. The 
member opposite can’t have it both ways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated yesterday, and as we’ve indicated on 
a number of occasions, there’s more than one permit or licence 
or approval or certificate that is required. There’s a 10-step 
process. There’s an aquatic habitat licence. There’s a water 
rights licence. There’s a licence to operate, a licence to 
construct. There’s a number of different steps that are required. 
And, Mr. Speaker, as email after email shows and indicates, and 
as I talked about yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that the process was 
followed professionally by the civil service. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s the way it should be and that’s the way that it was in this 
case. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, speaking of having it both ways, 
the question remains: is a high-profile individual treated 
differently or treated the same as everyone else? 
 
Mr. Speaker, on July 5th, a month after that high-level meeting 
that the Premier attended, a member of the public saw a track 
hoe doing work on the South Saskatchewan river, resulting in a 
TIP [Turn in Poachers and Environmental Violators] call to the 
Ministry of the Environment and a conservation officer going 
out to investigate on the 12th of July. 
 
Had a member of the public not phoned the government’s 
wildlife protection TIP line in early July, Mr. Speaker, the call 
that appears to have launched the investigation that resulted in 
charges, would charges have been pursued? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, and I, in fairness to the member opposite, I didn’t 
directly answer his previous question. Frankly, Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t know who did that inspection by the Ministry of the 
Environment. Frankly I don’t think it matters, because of the 
fact that charges were laid. So clearly the investigation was a 
complete, full and complete investigation. Charges were laid 
and, in this case, Mr. Boyd pled guilty to two of those charges, 
which seems to suggest that it was a very fulsome investigation 
that was undertook, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that this shows that there were infractions, 
Mr. Speaker, that charges were investigated, they were laid and, 
Mr. Speaker, as has been indicated previously, a $35,000 fine 
has been assessed to Mr. Boyd in this case and the shoreline 
must be remediated at Mr. Boyd’s cost. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, the question 
does remain: did the charges result from the initial complaint, 
the initial observation? Or only from the later tip? 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve obtained through freedom of information a 
timeline of the Bill Boyd irrigation project, assembled by a 
director at the Water Security Agency. According to this 
timeline, on July 20th: 
 

A site inspection was conducted by the Water Security 
Agency and the Ministry of the Environment, and 
determined the work as done would not have been 
approved in the permitting process, referring to the aquatic 
habitat protection Act. 

 
As a result, an immediate environmental protection order was 
issued — immediate. Now, Mr. Speaker, this was the second 
MOE [Ministry of the Environment] site inspection to be 
conducted since the early June high-level meeting that the 
Premier attended. Yet only after that tip from the public that 
triggered an investigation by a conservation officer was an 
environmental protection order issued. So why was no such 
order issued after the early June inspections first confirmed that 
that infraction had taken place? Why did it take until the 20th of 
July? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, again as has been indicated, in terms of an individual 
getting a licence to irrigate, there’s a 10-step process that they 
must undertake, Mr. Speaker. This involves a water licence, 
which determines whether or not there’s enough water to fulfill 
the application but as well the other obligations from that water 
body. There’s a licence to operate, a licence to construct, an 
irrigation certificate that is required from the Ministry of 
Agriculture. This involves three different government 
organizations, Mr. Speaker, as has been indicated. 
 
And I think the facts show in this case, Mr. Boyd was treated no 
different than anybody else. There were infractions that were 
found. Mr. Speaker, certainly there was an investigation. There 



April 24, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4005 

was people visually on the ground seeing the work that had 
been done as a part of the investigation. Charges were laid. Mr. 
Boyd pled guilty and a $35,000 fine plus a remediation order 
that Mr. Boyd has to pay for. So, Mr. Speaker, I think in this 
case, clearly Mr. Boyd was not treated in any preferential 
matter. He was treated in a professional matter by everybody 
involved. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The repeated assertion 
that Mr. Boyd was treated the same as any other member of the 
public simply doesn’t hold water. And the questions still 
remain. Would the charges have taken place had that tip not 
been placed? Why wasn’t an environmental protection order not 
put in in the first infraction? Why was there no EPO 
[environmental protection order] on that first infraction? 
 
Mr. Speaker, a tip was called in. A conservation officer was 
investigating and seeking witness statements from the WSA 
[Water Security Agency] on their interactions with Mr. Boyd. 
And on August 8th and 9th, permits were issued by the 
ministries of Agriculture and Environment, retroactively 
granting a special lease, an approval to operate a water rights 
licence, green-lighting a project that was already under way. 
 
To the Premier and then minister of the Environment, the 
Premier: why did Bill Boyd receive permits for this project in 
early August after the record of flagrant and continuing 
violations was already identified — permits that sought to 
retroactively approve the damage Boyd had already done, 
actions for which he would be charged just a few weeks later? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I will try again. In order for an individual to get a 
permit for an irrigation operation, they deal with three separate 
entities of government dealing with several different pieces of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, and different individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture pointed out last week 
why the special licence was permitted. It was because there was 
an error with the survey and the wrong points were used in 
conducting that survey, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A water rights licence is not the same as an approval to build or 
operate an irrigation. It is simply determining whether or not 
there is enough water, which . . . It’s the South Saskatchewan 
River, Mr. Speaker. I’m not a hydrologist but I probably could 
figure out that there’s enough water, Mr. Speaker. So these are 
separate issues. They’re separate permits. There’s not just one 
magic permit, and the two former Environment ministers would 
know this, and certainly they should help to educate the Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, what step in that orderly regular 
process that would be the same for every member of the public, 
at what step do we regularly call in the deputy minister of 
Agriculture, deputy minister of the Environment, deputy 
minister to the Premier, and the Minister of Environment? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the fact that, 
as the member should know . . . He may have this email; I don’t 
know. But it’s July 28th from one official in the Water Security 
Agency to the president, talks about:  
 

In the normal course of events we issue temporary water 
rights licences [which apparently Mr. Boyd wanted a 
temporary licence] and leave it to the user to ensure that 
they have the necessary rights. [Goes on to say] I was not 
prepared to provide a temporary approval either verbally 
or through the products portal. He [meaning Mr. Boyd] 
was clearly disappointed but remained respectful and 
understanding of our requirements. 

 
So obviously he was not given preferential treatment on this. 
 
With respect to why a deputy minister would be involved and 
why the ministers would be informed, Mr. Speaker, that very 
member said last week: 
 

You would think that he would know [meaning the 
Premier, the former minister at the time] if one of his 
members within his caucus was accessing services within 
his ministry and going directly to ministry employees. Was 
he not paying attention . . . [in case he’s not fully doing his 
job]? 

 
Mr. Speaker, how would the minister become aware of what’s 
going on in the ministry? It’s because the deputy minister 
speaks and informs the minister of what’s going on, Mr. 
Speaker. So the member can’t have it both ways. Either the 
minister is made aware of what’s going on or he’s not. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, this clearly is a special case. It 
involves Mr. Boyd, a well-known figure in that party with a 
long record, and then at the time an elected member of this 
Assembly, who continued . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, clearly this was a special case. It 
involved Bill Boyd, at that time a member of this Assembly and 
a member with a reputation for a number of different 
concerning activities, Mr. Speaker, a member who continued to 
advance a project for which he had not obtained the required 
permissions, a project that had already been found to have 
violated The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act as far back as June. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why didn’t the Premier — who seems quite quiet 
on the issue today — why didn’t the Premier under his watch 
hold this individual to a higher standard and deny his permit 
until at the very least a determination was made on whether he 
would be charged? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 



4006 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2018 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — So, Mr. Speaker, let me get this straight. 
So now the Leader of the Opposition thinks that the minister 
should step in and determine who and who is not given a 
permit. But at the same time he’s asking, why is the deputy 
minister and the minister getting involved in this, Mr. Speaker? 
So, Mr. Speaker, if he wants the minister to get involved, how 
would the minister get involved if he’s not made aware by the 
deputy minister of what’s happening in the ministry, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been indicated before, and I’ll say this again 
— the member probably has this email as well — Mr. Boyd in 
previous emails had said that this was, in his case, an urgent 
case. He wanted speedy timelines. An official that was dealing 
with this case asked the president of the Water Security 
Agency, you know, should we make . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . I’ll be happy to. Should we make this a little bit more 
quick? And the president said this: “No. Follow the process that 
we would normally use,” Mr. Speaker. Clearly email after email 
after email shows that with respect to Mr. Boyd’s dealing with 
the civil service, that he was treated professionally. 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Availability of Government Officials 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, still no answers from the other 
side. None, Mr. Speaker. I’m surprised they think those are 
answers. Yesterday in the House we asked yet again for some 
transparency on the GTH [Global Transportation Hub]. We 
know several members in cabinet called for that transparency in 
their leadership campaigns, but yesterday in question period, in 
committee, and in the rotunda, the Minister Responsible for 
Trade and Export — not the minister responsible for the GTH, 
Mr. Speaker — would not allow Mr. Pushor to provide any 
answers. 
 
Journalists asked to speak to Mr. Pushor but they wouldn’t 
bring him out, which is a little odd, Mr. Speaker, considering 
last week the Sask Party had four different officials, including 
DMs [deputy minister], provide answers for the Premier. And 
we know some ministers can barely walk through the rotunda 
without having their DMs scrum for them. So, Mr. Speaker, 
what gives? Why is the Sask Party allowing the questioning of 
some officials but not others? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — What an absurd line of questioning 
from the member opposite, Mr. Speaker. She’s a former House 
leader. You would presume that she would understand the 
process for how estimates work, Mr. Speaker, where the deputy 
minister and officials of the relevant department are those that 
attend estimates. So I had my deputy minister responsible for 
Immigration and Career Training there for a part of the 
discussion last night. I also had my deputy minister responsible 
for Trade and Export Development, along with supporting 
officials, there at estimates for last night. The deputy minister 
that they attempted to call . . . Well it could be characterized 
charitably as political grandstanding and perhaps uncharitably 
in another way, Mr. Speaker. 
 

They have the opportunity to raise these questions, which they 
did in estimates. I was happy to address them in estimates. I’m 
happy to address them in the House, Mr. Speaker. We’re proud 
of our provincial nominee program. We’re proud of the fact that 
over 100,000 newcomers have come to this province from 
outside of Canada over the course of the last decade — a rate of 
growth that we would never have seen under the NDP. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the Chair of the 
committee would quibble with whether or not he was happy to 
answer those questions. You could just check the record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the minister who continually stood up in 
this House and said there was no wrongdoing at the GTH. Then 
he ran for leader, found religion, and admitted that he had 
serious concerns about the GTH but was just defending the 
position of government. But now after that very short time of 
the leadership race, he’s back in cabinet and it seems he’s 
lapsed back to his old ways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is this one official off limits? Why this 
official is off limits does beg the question since he was 
intimately involved with the GTH land scandal. But still the 
Saskatchewan Party continues to deny access to him. 
 
Yesterday in an article published in the Leader-Post, the 
Minister of Trade and Export said his favourite tradition of 
parliament is, and I quote, “. . . the chamber right here, it’s not 
just a chamber. It’s actually a court of law as well and 
Parliament itself a court of law . . .” 
 
If this is this minister’s favourite tradition, why won’t he let this 
central official testify and give witness before the members of 
this Assembly? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Oh my goodness. You know, once 
again just, charitably, an absurd line of questioning from the 
member opposite. The member opposite knows how estimates 
work. The relevant officials come to committee. They respond 
to questions, along with ministers, with regard to estimates of 
that department that are up for discussion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One very interesting part of committee last night that I think 
was relevant, and I would put to the Leader of the Opposition: 
we saw a break in caucus solidarity on the other side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker. We saw the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview, and I respect her position on this, but she broke ranks 
with her leader explicitly on the carbon tax, Mr. Speaker. She 
said very clearly that she doesn’t agree with her leader’s 
position on this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would challenge the Leader of the Opposition, because I 
would suspect, Mr. Speaker, that there are more members 
opposite who do not agree with the leader’s position on the 
carbon tax, who think that this is a wrong position, that 
surrendering to Justin Trudeau, like the member’s opposite 
position. They don’t agree with that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 



April 24, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4007 

Graduation Rates of First Nations and Métis Students 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Of course, no answer from that very 
smug minister, Mr. Speaker. But, you know, we are very 
thankful for the work . . . 
 
The Speaker: — [Inaudible] . . . withdraw that smug word. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I withdraw that comment. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. I recognize the member for 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we are very thankful for 
the work of the Children’s Advocate, who provided a road map 
of how we could do better for Saskatchewan’s children and 
youth in his annual report released today. 
 
The advocate raised concerns about what he called unacceptable 
graduation rates — 43 per cent among indigenous students 
compared to 85 per cent among non-indigenous. He noted that 
the government said that they support closing the education 
funding gap for on-reserve students, but haven’t followed up 
with any action. He called on the province to go hand in hand 
with First Nations to the federal government and demand 
funding. 
 
The last premier stood in this Assembly and joined me in 
calling on the federal government to close that funding gap 
immediately. Will this new Premier not only do the same, but 
follow up with concrete actions to address this crisis, knowing 
that we’ll stand united? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all, let me just acknowledge the work that the 
Children’s Advocate has done on behalf of the children of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. We’re quite pleased to get his report, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, of course, when it comes to graduation rates, I’ve stood in 
the House before, Mr. Speaker, talked about increased 
graduation rates among First Nations children at any school in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I know a number of school 
divisions are quite pleased and quite proud of the fact that 
they’ve increased graduation rates over the last number of years 
with respect to First Nations and Métis children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:30] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have commented in this House before we 
are having ongoing conversations with the federal government 
in terms of working to close the funding gap which is between 
First Nations and non-First Nations, Mr. Speaker. We’ll 
continue to have those conversations. We’re as aggressive as 
we can be, Mr. Speaker. I’ll continue to discuss this with the 
federal government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’ll continue to work on increasing graduation rates right 
here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. As I say, they’ve increased 
over the last number of years, Mr. Speaker, and we’re quite 
proud of the progress that we’ve made. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Social Services for First Nations and Métis Children 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, another area that we’re not 
seeing meaningful progress is the growing number of children 
in the province’s care. There are more than 750 more children 
in care than there were just five years ago. The vast majority of 
these children are indigenous, and 79 per cent of those who 
were lost and 65 per cent of children who sustained critical 
injuries were First Nations or Métis children. This is 
unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The very first Call to Action from the TRC’s [Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission] report was to reduce the number of 
Aboriginal children in care. Despite this government accepting 
the TRC’s Calls to Action, this government’s sitting on its 
hands while we see progress and action both with our 
neighbours in the east and the west, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To the minister: what is the Sask Party going to do to reduce the 
number of First Nations and Métis children in care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I also 
want to join in thanking the Children’s Advocate for the report. 
It was a very good report and we’re looking forward to going 
through it in more detail, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But some of the things that I can say that we’ve done is we’ve 
worked with our First Nations communities. We have 16 First 
Nation partners with us, Mr. Speaker, in Social Services, out 
there actually delivering services on the ground, on the reserve, 
and sometimes off the reserve because we do understand, Mr. 
Speaker, that some cases go from on-reserve to off-reserve. 
 
We continue to work with our partners in the North as well as 
all of the other First Nations to make sure that we are providing 
the best service for the children in care. As everybody in this 
House knows, children are our best resource, Mr. Speaker. We 
want to make sure that we continue to work with our First 
Nations to be able for them to have the most potential for 
success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Organ and Tissue Donation Physicians 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Saskatchewan people are generous people. 
But unfortunately our province lags far behind the rest of the 
country when it comes to organ donation. Experts said we 
needed two donor physician positions back when we were 
passing The Human Tissue Gift Act in 2015. Then they scaled 
their request back to one because of Sask Party inaction. 
 
We’ve learned recently that three doctors will split a half-time 
position as donor physicians. This half-time allotment is 
welcome, but it’s only half of what experts say is a small start 
to improve donation rates here. We just need to look to Ontario 
that has some of the best rates in Canada. They will have 120 
times the number of donation physicians that we have, Mr. 



4008 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2018 

Speaker. Does this minister really think that this one half-time 
position is enough? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
the member opposite’s question. Obviously it’s very clear that 
organ donation rates in Saskatchewan are far below where we’d 
like to see them. So the legislative committee was appointed. 
They came out with the recommendations that the Health critic 
spoke about, Mr. Speaker. We’re taking those recommendations 
very seriously. 
 
We’re enacting a number of them, Mr. Speaker. We’re looking 
at expansion of a number of areas to encourage it. I was at an 
announcement yesterday, Mr. Speaker, with a couple of 
transplant recipients that spoke to their experiences, Mr. 
Speaker. It was extremely powerful and it spoke to the need that 
we need to increase the number of transplant recipients and 
donors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Specifically to the member opposite’s question about the donor 
physicians, we need to start somewhere. Mr. Speaker, to this 
point there’s been nothing done in the province ever, so, Mr. 
Speaker, we had to start somewhere. We’re starting with the 
donor physicians job-sharing a half-time position. Mr. Speaker, 
they feel it’s a great start. We feel it’s a great start, but it’s just a 
start, Mr. Speaker. You’re going to see more expansion of this 
program in the coming years. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — A hundred and twenty times the number of 
donor physicians than we will have here, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pretty sure that Ontario’s population isn’t 120 times our 
population. This is an issue the Sask Party has known about for 
years, our abysmal donation rates. They even commissioned a 
legislative committee to find solutions. Why are they ignoring 
the work of that committee and failing to provide the number of 
donor physicians and additional supports that we need to 
actually really improve donation rates here? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I just spoke to the legislative 
committee. Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious issue that’s 
impacted many, many lives. One of my best friends is a liver 
transplant recipient, about 11 or 12 years ago, Mr. Speaker, and 
is doing fine because of it. We want to do all we can to enhance 
the number of donors, Mr. Speaker. We’re not stopping here. 
This is a starting point, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to continue to 
expand. We’re going to continue to evaluate . . . Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s an important issue but the member heckles from 
her seat about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is we’re going to continue to 
expand this program. I mentioned this old adage at the scrum 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker. There’s an old saying that says, the best 
time to plant a tree is 25 year ago; the second-best time is today. 
That’s what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. We’re kicking off this 
program, Mr. Speaker. We’re taking this extremely seriously. In 
the coming years you’re going to see this program expanded, 

but it has to start somewhere. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Deferred Ruling 
 
The Speaker: — I have a statement. I have a statement to read. 
 
Earlier today, the Opposition House Leader raised the question 
of privilege under the provisions of rule 12 of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. I 
received the notice this morning, Tuesday, April the 24th, 2018 
at 11:10 a.m. Upon receipt of this notice and in accordance with 
the rules, both House leaders have been informed of the details 
of the case and the proposed question of privilege. 
 
It was the responsibility of the Speaker to determine if a prima 
facie case of privilege has been established. Contempt of the 
Assembly is a serious charge which requires careful 
examination of the case and this Assembly’s practices and 
precedents. However, I have not had sufficient time to carefully 
consider all matters related to this question, so for this reason I 
shall defer my ruling. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answer to question 227. 
 
The Speaker: — Tabled, 227. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to question 228. 
 
The Speaker: — Ordered, question 228. I recognize the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 229 and 230. 
 
The Speaker: — Tabled, 229 and 230. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 126 — The Energy Export Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to move second reading of The Energy Export Act, 2018. 
This Act has been created to respond to the inaction of the 
federal government to assert its jurisdictional authority to 
ensure the Trans Mountain expansion project proceeds. 
 
Bill 126 will create the legislative framework necessary to 



April 24, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4009 

optimize the value of Saskatchewan’s oil, gas, and refined 
petroleum products. The legislation is similar in intent to the 
legislation recently introduced by the Government of Alberta. 
The Act establishes a permitting process for individuals or 
corporations that are seeking to sell or transfer such products 
outside the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new legislation will provide a means to help 
safeguard and advance the province’s key economic energy 
interests. These interests include jobs, investment, industry 
revenue, and activity in our oil and gas sector. Saskatchewan’s 
oil and gas industry accounts for as much as 15 per cent of our 
provincial gross domestic product, and it supports the 
employment of tens of thousands of people throughout our 
province and half a million people across Canada. This is a 
sector that generated $9.2 billion in combined oil and gas 
production in Saskatchewan in 2017. 
 
The expansion of our national pipeline capacity is vital — vital 
to the future of our energy sector and to the jobs that flow 
directly and indirectly from it. Increasing access to tidewater for 
our oil and gas products would inject billions of dollars into 
Canada’s economy. Access to overseas markets is critical to 
getting the world price for Canadian crude oil and to ending the 
supply/demand imbalance that currently discounts Canadian 
crude oil in oversupplied North American markets. For 
example, Saskatchewan lost an estimated $210 million in 
royalties, taxes, and other revenue, and producers lost an 
estimated 2.6 billion last year due to lack of pipeline access to 
tidewater. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government will always stand up for 
Saskatchewan and defend the people and businesses that rely on 
our oil and gas industry, which means taking action, taking 
action in response to the ongoing obstruction of this project and 
to federal inaction. Federally approved and properly regulated 
pipelines are integral to the continued growth and core 
economic interests of Saskatchewan and of Canada. The 
expansion of our national pipeline capacity must not be 
obstructed by a lack of federal leadership or by provinces 
attempting to overstep their constitutional authority. 
 
It should be noted that our government considers Bill 126 to be 
a last resort that will be used only if the Trans Mountain 
expansion project continues to be stalled by provincial 
obstruction or by federal inaction, and if the Government of 
Alberta acts upon its similar legislation, but we don’t want to be 
in this position and we hope we don’t have to act upon this 
legislation.  
 
We believe we must do something because the federal 
government in the past 18 months, since it has approved this 
pipeline, has failed to ensure construction could proceed. With 
that in mind, Mr. Speaker, this bill provides a sunset clause 
provision which allows the Act to expire unless it is amended to 
extend that deadline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now move second reading of The Energy Export 
Act, 2018. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
The Energy Export Act. The question before the Assembly is a 
motion by the minister that Bill 126, The Energy Export Act be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, to ask for leave to revert to 
introduction of guests. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll tell you what. Let’s have a Speaker’s 
mulligan. I’ll have the minister redo. Let’s finish up this piece 
before you stand. Okay? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Sorry, 
Minister, could you . . . Yes, I’ll . . . Question, but I’ll get a 
repeat. Speaker’s mulligan.  
 
The question before the Assembly is the motion by the minister 
that Bill No. 126, The Energy Export Act be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 
recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I’m asking for leave to 
introduce a guest. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has asked for 
leave to introduce a guest. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Sure, leave’s granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 
leave. And I thank my colleagues throughout the Assembly for 
granting me leave to do introduction of guests. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
really important to know that there are different groups and 
organizations that come to Regina. It’s a long ways into the city 
and there are various people visit us from all throughout 
Saskatchewan. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And I’m very pleased to see one of my constituents here that’s 
involved with the Women in the Legislature effort. And, Mr. 
Speaker, she’s from my home community, or from my home 
region of Athabasca, and she’s from the neighbouring First 
Nations of Canoe Lake. So I want to welcome, I want to say a 
special welcome to Monica Iron, and basically to tell her: 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
So my translation: I’m so proud of her coming here to the 
Assembly, and I told her very clearly that she’s a proud member 
of the Canoe Lake First Nations and she’s the best, but not to be 
afraid of this Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s really important that I offer her a 



4010 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2018 

great welcome from the office of the MLA. And I see very 
bright and positive things developing for any woman that wants 
to join the effort of getting involved with politics. So, Monica, 
welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 126 — The Energy Export Act 
(continued) 

 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for the 
opportunity to get up and make initial comments on The Energy 
Export Act. Now, Mr. Speaker, what I want to point out to the 
Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan that are listening 
to this particular debate is the argument around the pipeline 
sector and the opportunity that Saskatchewan must embrace 
when it comes to exporting as many of our resources as 
possible. In most recent weeks we’ve been hearing about the 
battle between Alberta and British Columbia over the pipeline, 
that people have been speaking up for a long, long time, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What’s important that people in Saskatchewan ought to know, 
Mr. Speaker, as we look through this bill, I want to point out 
from the official opposition perspective a number of really 
important things. As we look at how we export our oil and gas, 
and as we export our potash, and as we export our wheat and 
other resources, Mr. Speaker, we must be very careful to do the 
right thing. This is a very serious matter. It is a very serious 
matter and it’s going to take a lot of collective thought, Mr. 
Speaker, on how we address the challenge of getting all our 
product to tidewater, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also know in the Assembly, and certainly from the 
opposition perspective, is that we have to have global 
discussion, global thinking on this particular bill. There’s no 
question that there is a number of issues that we have to raise, 
and we have to make sure we think our way through this very 
serious matter as thoroughly as possible. 
 
There also has to be great interaction, Mr. Speaker, between the 
industry and the various players in the province as we embark 
on this particular journey because this interaction is vital to 
understanding what their needs are, what the challenges are, and 
certainly what the opportunities are as we move together on this 
particular bill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we also got to point out that there has to be 
robust discussion. So as the official opposition, we looked at the 
parameters on how we look at this particular bill. And we’re 
talking about the very, very need, the very necessity that we 
have four or five principles attached to discussing this bill. 
 
We know it is a very serious matter. There’s got to be global 
thinking on every front. On every front there’s got to be great 
interaction, Mr. Speaker, and there has to be robust discussion 
and consulting with all the parties involved. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
I want to point out to the people that may be listening on this 
particular bill, there is no question in our minds, as we said time 
and time again, that the pipeline is necessary for Western 

Canada. 
 
A number of years ago we have spoken . . . we were privy to 
the discussions around the former premier as they signed this 
New West Partnership, Mr. Speaker. Now where is that 
partnership today, Mr. Speaker? There was not the time taken 
then to have these discussions. The Saskatchewan Party 
government had that opportunity under the New West 
Partnership, and the previous leader in the current government 
did not take that opportunity to address some of these matters, 
Mr. Speaker. So clearly they had a failure to anticipate this, and 
quite frankly this is certainly a big part of their fault in the sense 
of not protecting the jobs, the mortgage-paying jobs that are 
attached to the oil and gas sector, and therefore attached to the 
pipeline that we’re speaking about today, and therefore attached 
to the bill that we’re debating in the Assembly today. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we know that the federal government has 
approved this project. The project has gone through a rigorous 
process, and that we also know in the opposition that it is in 
Saskatchewan’s interest to go forward. It is in our interest to go 
forward. And from our perspective in the opposition we often 
look at how we balance all the discussion around the need for 
this pipeline to go through. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we talk about the economic opportunities 
attached to a vibrant oil and gas sector development 
opportunity, or a strategy, Mr. Speaker. We also talk about the 
environmental benefits of making sure we do what is necessary 
to protect those interests, and we balance those interests 
alongside of the economic opportunities attached to this project. 
We also . . . [inaudible] . . . some of the social opportunities, 
Mr. Speaker, that could be attached to this project. 
 
So we have taken a fairly robust and encompassing view on the 
value of this particular pipeline, and that’s why it’s important 
that we state unequivocally, Mr. Speaker, that when it comes to 
this particular pipeline, that we need the pipeline to proceed for 
Saskatchewan’s future economic interest, as well as balancing 
those interests against the environmental integrity that would be 
required. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, there’s a great 
opportunity for some of the social benefits to flow to 
Saskatchewan people as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned at the outset, we spoke about the 
opportunity to show leadership. Under the New West 
Partnership, it was not taken care of then. And this is one of the 
reasons why today we’re having this dilemma because 
Saskatchewan had the opportunity and it failed to anticipate 
some of these challenges, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other matter that’s also quite concerning, Mr. Speaker, is 
that you look at the people that work in the pipeline industry, 
the people that build our pipe and the people that work at Evraz, 
Mr. Speaker. This party, this opposition party say to those 
workers that we support the 1,100 workers at Evraz who will be 
supplying 75 per cent of the pipe for this project. It’s really 
important to note that these are Saskatchewan jobs. These are 
Saskatchewan people that pay Saskatchewan taxes and, Mr. 
Speaker, they buy goods in our stores. Mr. Speaker, they 
support their families. They invest in their communities. 
 
So these 1,100 jobs and 1,100 workers at Evraz need to be 



April 24, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4011 

recognized for the fact that they will be supplying 75 per cent of 
the pipe for this project. And that is the reason why the 
opposition is going to stand up in the Assembly today to say, 
yes there is an opportunity, and that opportunity is right in front 
of us. And, Mr. Speaker, we have to, we have got to take the 
opportunity to protect those jobs and do all we can and leave no 
stone unturned in an effort to try and see the pipeline move 
forward. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we begin the process, when we talk about 
a robust discussion, an interaction of how this is really a serious 
matter, I say to the workers at Evraz that the Sask Party’s 
failure to anticipate this and address this in the past years when 
they had the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, they did not do so. They 
took a great risk, Mr. Speaker. So one of the points that I would 
raise is that in the past years they have failed to lead on this 
front, and this is why we’re in a predicament as such today. 
 
Now I say to the workers at Evraz as well that when we look at 
the importance of balancing those good, solid jobs for the future 
of Saskatchewan, we must also make sure we protect the 
environment, as everyone will say in Saskatchewan. So as the 
Sask Party has no credibility, has no credibility on making sure 
that we take care of the environment as we protect these jobs, 
achieving that balance that we speak about in the opposition, 
Mr. Speaker, it goes to their credibility when dealing with other 
provinces and certainly with the federal government. 
 
Now the final point I would make to the workers at Evraz, the 
1,100 workers at Evraz, is this, is this Saskatchewan Party 
government have failed to lay one inch of pipe to tidewater over 
the last 10 years. I’ll say it again so the Sask Party can hear it 
loud and clear. You have failed to lay one inch of pipeline to 
tidewater in over 10 years. You have failed to get the job done. 
 
And now they’ve cut climate change, Mr. Speaker. They have 
no plan to reduce greenhouse gases. All these inactions on 
behalf of the provincial government, Mr. Speaker, we say to 
them, is they had the opportunity and they couldn’t get the job 
done. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we talk about the failure of the 
government to anticipate this, their failure to get one inch of 
pipeline built to tidewater, Mr. Speaker, we see now they’re 
jumping up with this particular bill and hoping to look good 
when, Mr. Speaker, they could’ve been spending the last 
number of years preparing for this very challenging time. They 
did not do that, Mr. Speaker. They did not get the job done. 
 
What’s important as well, now we’re hearing confusion from 
the right wing, Mr. Speaker. We’re hearing confusion from the 
right wing because now they’re suggesting . . . 
 
[Interjections]  
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Now as 
we talk about the robust discussion that has to happen and the 
interaction that’s really important for — as the minister alluded 
to — the $9.2 billion opportunity that Saskatchewan has in 
dealing with this particular matter, Mr. Speaker, now we’re 
hearing from the Saskatchewan Party that somewhat are 

confused on their position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First of all, they have taxed the industry to the point where 
many are really concerned about the tax rate in the province of 
Saskatchewan. They have failed to get the job done. Now some 
of the most ardent right wing politicians from across the way, 
Mr. Speaker, now they’re also talking about investing in 
pipelines, of them getting into the business of building 
pipelines, as the Premier of Alberta has discussed. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they haven’t even had those discussions with the 
current industry people that are saying, well what does that 
mean for industry? 
 
And that’s my point, Mr. Speaker, as I point out to the people of 
Saskatchewan, this matter has been handled terribly by the 
Saskatchewan Party because they’re not sure what to do within 
this predicament, Mr. Speaker. So what they’ve typically done, 
Mr. Speaker, whenever they get cornered on a certain matter, is 
they get up and they criticize the other parties and, Mr. Speaker, 
they also do what we find, which is a great failure on their part 
and a great injustice to the people of Saskatchewan: they 
politically grandstand on issues of this importance. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I say to the people of Saskatchewan, we 
have to have discussions. We have to have interactions with the 
people that create jobs in the oil and gas sector in 
Saskatchewan. We have to make sure as well that when it 
comes to protecting the environment, looking at the green 
energy options, Mr. Speaker, we have to be able to establish our 
credibility as a province. And as a party we’ve been saying that 
on this side of the Assembly, because in the long run, as you 
take care of business, business will take care of the jobs and 
there won’t be the threat to jobs that we see today. So it’s all 
connected. It is all interactive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we’re sitting here trying to wonder what will the future 
bring, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why it’s important to tell people 
today that, as we look at this bill from the opposition 
perspective, we are imploring the government to show 
leadership. And how you show leadership is you understand 
that this is a very serious matter. There should be no political 
grandstanding. There should be global thinking on this front, no 
knee-jerk reactions to investing in a pipeline, Mr. Speaker, as 
some of the ardent right wingers out there think should happen. 
There should be great interaction and discussion with all 
industry people and all impacted people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need leadership on this from the Saskatchewan Party, 
because in the past they have failed miserably on trying to 
anticipate this, Mr. Speaker. And that’s a crying shame because, 
as I mentioned, there’s a great number of jobs and a great 
number of opportunity for many people in many sectors 
attached to our oil and gas sector. And this pipeline is an 
important piece of that thinking, Mr. Speaker, and so far the 
Saskatchewan Party has failed to get the job done. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the Assembly, we are going 
to undertake that global thinking. On this side of the Assembly, 
we are going to undertake that interaction. We are going to 
place a serious emphasis on where we go as it relates to the 
opportunity attached to this bill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we know as a landlocked province that 



4012 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2018 

there’s a lot of discussion has to revolve around oil and gas. It 
has to revolve around wheat. It also has to revolve around 
potash, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got to get our resources to 
tidewater and, Mr. Speaker, this is why this pipeline is so 
crucial. And this is why I tell the people clearly from our 
perspective that there is a lot of discussion required. And we 
need to see that opportunity achieved, not only for Alberta but 
for Saskatchewan as well in co-operation through good, solid 
negotiation discussions with BC [British Columbia]. 
 
[15:00] 
 
But clearly, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve said, this project has had its 
public hearings. This project has been approved by the federal 
Liberal government. We encourage them to proceed with the 
project because, as I mentioned, Saskatchewan has a lot to lose. 
And the people, from our perspective, the official opposition, 
do not want to see those 1,100 jobs lost at Evraz. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I know I’ll have other members of 
my caucus that’ll be discussing this matter at great lengths. It is 
really dominating many of our discussions and our meetings as 
a caucus, because we know that this is a very serious matter, 
and we’ll continue treating this matter as such. So on that note, 
I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 126, The Energy 
Export Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 126, The Energy Export Act. 
Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 127 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I am here today to move 
second reading of Bill No. 127, The Income Tax Amendment 
Act, 2018. This legislation implements various income tax 
initiatives that were announced on April 10th, 2018 as part of 
the 2018-19 provincial budget. The 2018-19 budget has 
introduced a number of revenue initiatives to support 
Saskatchewan’s growth agenda and to remain on track to 
address continuing fiscal challenges facing the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The 2017-18 budget announced that personal income tax rates 
would be reduced in two stages: an initial half-point reduction 
on July 1st, 2017, and a second half-point reduction on July 1st, 
2019. The first stage of this reduction is providing a further 121 
million in income tax savings to Saskatchewan residents in 
2018. Mr. Speaker, this legislation will temporarily suspend the 
tax rate reduction plan. The tax rates have now been reduced by 
a half-point and will remain at these levels for the time being. A 
number of other provisions throughout the Act that reference 
the tax rates are also being amended. 
 
This legislation maintains the existing provincial infirm 
dependent tax credit and caregiver tax credit. In its 2017-18 
budget, the federal government announced a consolidation of 

federal caregiver-related income tax credits into a single Canada 
caregiver credit. Saskatchewan will not mirror the federal 
change in order to ensure that dependants who are currently 
eligible to be claimed under these tax credits remain eligible. 
 
In October 2017, the federal government announced an 
adjustment to the taxation of non-eligible dividends, generally 
those received from small business corporations, beginning in 
2018. As a result of the linkage between the federal and 
provincial personal income tax systems, the federal change 
would automatically increase provincial income taxes on this 
type of dividend income. Mr. Speaker, to offset this potential 
increase to provincial income taxes and to maintain the current 
level of provincial tax on non-eligible dividends, Saskatchewan 
will amend provincial legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to announce that this legislation will 
also introduce the income tax provisions required to provide 
two new-growth tax incentives that will grow and diversify our 
provincial economy: the Saskatchewan value-added agriculture 
incentive and the Saskatchewan technology start-up incentive. 
 
The Saskatchewan value-added agriculture incentive will 
provide a non-refundable corporate income tax credit equal to 
15 per cent of qualifying new capital expenditures. Eligible 
activities are defined in the new Saskatchewan value-added 
agriculture incentive Act as the physical transformation or 
upgrading of any raw or primary agriculture product or any 
agriculture by-product or waste into a new or upgraded product. 
 
Qualifying projects include new or existing value-added 
agriculture facilities making capital expenditures of at least 10 
million related to new or expanded productive capacity. 
Potential applicants will apply to the Saskatchewan Ministry of 
Trade and Export Development, demonstrating how the 
proposed project will meet the qualifying criteria. 
 
Once they have demonstrated that construction has been 
completed and the operations have begun, they will be issued a 
certificate of eligibility by the Ministry of Trade and Export 
Development. This certificate will state the amount of the 
company’s qualifying capital expenditures. Eligible companies 
can claim the 15 per cent tax credit by submitting the certificate 
of eligibility to the Saskatchewan Ministry of Finance, along 
with the company’s notice of assessment from the Canada 
Revenue Agency. The ministry will redeem the tax credit as a 
rebate up to the amount of the Saskatchewan corporation 
income tax paid by the company. 
 
To further encourage business investment in early-stage 
technology start-ups, Saskatchewan is introducing an incentive 
to increase the availability of patient and risk-tolerant seed 
capital. The Saskatchewan technology start-up incentive will 
address the capitalization challenges faced by technology 
start-ups. The STSI [Saskatchewan technology start-up 
incentive] will provide a non-refundable tax credit equal to 45 
per cent of qualifying new investments made in eligible small 
businesses. This will incent small Saskatchewan-based 
businesses that are early-stage technology start-ups developing 
new technologies or applying existing technologies in a new 
way to create proprietary new products, services, or processes. 
 
A new Saskatchewan technology start-up Act will establish the 



April 24, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4013 

eligibility, criteria, and certificate issuance process for this new 
incentive, similar to the processes being put in place for the 
Saskatchewan value-added agriculture incentive. The income 
tax 2000 is being amended to allow eligible corporations to use 
their eligibility certificates to claim a rebate of income tax that’s 
already paid. 
 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, in October 2017 our government 
introduced legislation to increase the small business income 
threshold from 500,000 to 600,000 effective January 1st, 2018. 
The Canada Revenue Agency has requested an additional 
technical amendment in order to provide taxpayers certainty 
that the 120 per cent gross up of the 500,000 federal threshold 
will be calculated correctly in accordance with the federal 
legislation and will be applied correctly in all circumstances. I 
therefore move second reading of Bill No. 127, The Income Tax 
Amendment Act, 2018. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
second reading motion moved by the minister that Bill No. 127, 
The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018 be now read a second 
time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? Recognize the 
member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And one of the points I want to raise is that we are certainly 
pleased to be able to stand in the Assembly today as the 
opposition and look at some of the proposals and some of the 
changes and the intent behind this particular bill, Bill 127, The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018. There are some significant 
changes, Mr. Speaker, and from our perspective, we want to 
make sure that we really take, as I’ve said time and time again, 
look at the impacts of what is being proposed in this particular 
bill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen the Saskatchewan Party do two 
things that’s alarming to the whole manner in how we tax the 
people of Saskatchewan and how we generate revenues and 
how we stimulate our economies, which is part and parcel of 
what governments do. And this particular bill does propose 
some of the measures, as the minister alluded to, in what she 
believes is important that we achieve. But, Mr. Speaker, the 
question that we have on this side of the Assembly is really, in 
the out years as we move forward from 2018 on to 2019, 2020, 
2021, Mr. Speaker, I think our debt is projected to be something 
like $23 billion by 2020, Mr. Speaker, or shortly thereafter. 
 
And it’s becoming an alarming scenario, Mr. Speaker, as to 
how the Saskatchewan Party is racking up the debt at such an 
alarming pace, Mr. Speaker. And from our perspective in the 
opposition, we need the people of Saskatchewan to know is that 
when we ask questions on The Income Tax Act, as we ask 
questions on some of the incentives being identified in this 
particular bill, Mr. Speaker, we have to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan the fact is when we look at the out years, two or 
three years from now, Saskatchewan’s going to be under a great 
burden of debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we don’t want to be people that are going to spread doom 
and gloom about the opportunity that Saskatchewan has in the 
future because we think we can build a stronger province as the 
official opposition. We have that confidence. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve cleaned up one mess already left behind by the 

Conservatives and, Mr. Speaker, we are prepared to do the work 
that is necessary by their provincial cousins, the Saskatchewan 
Party, because once again we’ve seen how they have taken the 
opportunity that we often talk about on this side of the 
Assembly, when they’ve inherited a booming economy, a 
growing population, and billions in the bank. 
 
And here we are 10 years later, Mr. Speaker. We’re looking at 
record tax increases as we witnessed last year, and now we’re 
looking at record debt, Mr. Speaker. And as they tinker with 
The Income Tax Act, they’re trying to again appear that they’re 
trying to manage the income tax levels to a point where that’s 
also going to add challenges, Mr. Speaker, to many people that 
are missed in this opportunity, the people that could really do a 
lot with the extra dollars they would have as the result of tax 
savings. 
 
We all know that eventually, Mr. Speaker, that that burgeoning 
debt that’s being built by the Saskatchewan Party, it’s going to 
come crashing down on the province of Saskatchewan, on the 
people of Saskatchewan. And this is one of the reasons why we 
pay a lot of interest to what this particular Finance minister is 
prepared to do, Mr. Speaker, and what she has done in the past, 
and certainly what does this mean for our future. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as we practised when we were in government, 
there was four or five initiatives that we undertook to make sure 
we achieved certain objectives. I know that over a four-year 
time frame, we had targeted reductions in specific taxes, Mr. 
Speaker. There was a debt surtax that was eliminated, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There was also a reduction of debt in various classes of people, 
a substantial amount of tax breaks for people that were in the 
middle-class sector, Mr. Speaker. We also looked at ways in 
which we could save families in the province of Saskatchewan 
a lot of the tax rates that were really, quite frankly, crushing 
many families because of the debt left behind by the Devine 
Conservatives, Mr. Speaker. So we’ve seen this Act before. 
 
And I’ve told many people in our travels that what the 
Saskatchewan Party is simply trying to do. They are a tired, old 
government whose days are numbered. They’re trying to rack 
up the debt as much as they can, as much as they can, so as they 
leave, they leave a significant challenge to the future of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s one of the reasons why 
we look at how they’re tinkering, again trying to facade this 
whole notion of trying to deal with income tax, Mr. Speaker, all 
the time avoiding the challenge that they themselves created 
just to achieve one thing, Mr. Speaker, and that is to keep power 
here in Saskatchewan. For the last three elections — no, four 
elections, Mr. Speaker — their targets are clear. 
 
But I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, I’d say to the people of 
Saskatchewan: that debt, you have a right to know what that 
debt is. Under the P3s [public-private partnership] we have the 
right to know what our obligations are. And on some of these 
megaprojects we have to know where the money is going, Mr. 
Speaker. The Saskatchewan Party is not sharing that, and this is 
the reason why, as they bring forward income tax amendments 
that are being proposed, as being discussed today, we pay very 
close attention to this party that have squandered the future of 
Saskatchewan just to do one thing and that is to retain power, 



4014 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2018 

Mr. Speaker. And I’ve said to the previous leader, and I say to 
them today: was it worth it, putting Saskatchewan’s future in 
doubt just for a short political gain, Mr. Speaker? And I suggest 
not. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan will continue finding out about 
these bills and the impact it has on their families as we continue 
exposing the years and years of Sask Party’s scandal, 
mismanagement, and abuse of our finances, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, on that note, I move that we adjourn Bill No. 127, The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 127, The Income Tax Amendment 
Act, 2018. Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 128 — The Provincial Sales Tax 
Amendment Act, 2018 

 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 
2018. This legislation implements various provincial sales tax 
initiatives that were announced on April 10th, 2018, as part of 
the 2018-19 provincial budget. These PST [provincial sales tax] 
measures continue to create a broader, sustainable revenue base 
and reduce government’s reliance on resource revenues. They 
support Saskatchewan’s growth agenda and allow us to remain 
on track to address continuing fiscal challenges faced by the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
[15:15] 
 
To implement this change, specific amendments to The 
Provincial Sales Tax Act are required: to remove the PST 
exemption for used light vehicles effective April 11th, 2018; to 
reinstate the trade-in allowance so that the PST will only be 
paid on the difference in price between the trade-in and the 
purchased vehicle; and to exempt from PST from the private 
sale of used vehicles with the purchase price of up to $5,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments also update the legislation with 
respect to PST exemptions that were announced in December 
2017, including an exemption of PST on naloxone and certain 
other non-prescription drugs that are used to treat 
life-threatening conditions and an exemption of PST on 
prepared food and beverages sold by charitable or non-profit 
organizations at concessions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to these changes, the amendments also 
include housekeeping items that further strengthen and 
modernize the legislation to sustain the province’s revenue 
base. 
 
The definition of “lease” is amended to clarify that a lease 
includes a supply of equipment or tools with an operator, and a 
new section is added to clarify the application of PST on 

equipment based on use or consumption using a prescribed 
formula. 
 
The definition of “vendor” is amended to provide additional 
clarity around retail sales into Saskatchewan and to include 
retail sales of taxable services. 
 
An amendment is being made to clarify that engineering 
services can be purchased exempt of PST when the services are 
included in the retail sale of real property services. 
 
And a new section is added to clarify the process around 
refunds for overpayment of tax. 
 
Amendments are being made to clarify security requirements 
and the responsibility of contractors and principals in regard to 
real property service contracts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity to 
present this legislation changes today, and I am pleased to move 
second reading of The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 
2018. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a second 
reading motion moved by the minister that Bill No. 128, The 
Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2018 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? Recognize 
the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And I want to point out again it’s my pleasure to offer the initial 
comments on Bill 128, The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment 
Act. And the minister spoke about very briefly some of the 
areas that she was expanding her tax, or as she puts it, looking 
at a broader, sustainable base. That was a quote that I’d like to 
use as a result of some of the points that she made. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, on the broader, sustainable base, Mr. 
Speaker, last year we saw the Saskatchewan Party increase 
taxes by a billion dollars. And I’ve made the statement time and 
time again on many of the opportunities I’ve had to publicly 
speak on the management of the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. This 
is a party that had record revenue for 10 years. And then despite 
having record revenue for those 10 years — and I might add, 
revenues that no other government in the history of 
Saskatchewan ever, ever saw, record revenue for 10 years — 
and last year they had record tax hikes, Mr. Speaker, over a 
billion dollars in tax hikes. And every different corner they can 
find a ways and means they can increase taxes, Mr. Speaker, 
this particular party did it. And now we’re looking, Mr. 
Speaker, at record debt. 
 
So as you look at the history of the Saskatchewan Party, people 
in the province are really beginning to figure them out. They 
had record revenue for a long time, then they went to record tax 
increases. How in the heck does that translate into record debt? 
Doesn’t make any sense, Mr. Speaker, but that is Tory math for 
you and that continues to plague the history of Saskatchewan. 
And once again Saskatchewan is being left behind to pay the 
bill and, Mr. Speaker, as the minister alluded to, continuing 
fiscal challenges. 
 
No such language existed before the last election, Mr. Speaker. 



April 24, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4015 

PST on used cars reinstated. No such discussion at the last 
election, Mr. Speaker. And talk about the trade-offs that the 
people of Saskatchewan have. I’m not sure that millions of 
dollars are going to be attached to the used car premiums now 
that they are being taxed by the Saskatchewan Party. As I 
would point out to the people, every single tax that’s been 
identified in this particular bill and other bills is compliments of 
the Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
As I’ve said time and time again, there’s not a tax that they 
don’t like, Mr. Speaker. And then as they do all these broad, 
sweeping tax hikes, Mr. Speaker, and fee increases, and as you 
look at the reduction of services throughout Saskatchewan, and 
then what they do is they offer a small one-half of a per cent 
reduction in personal income tax. Well, Mr. Speaker, families 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan, as you look at rising 
food costs, Mr. Speaker, they look at insurance costs being 
elevated because of this particular government’s activity. They 
look at the challenge around power and how much people are 
paying now for their electricity, Mr. Speaker, and they get 
further aggravated when they hear that some of the money 
they’re paying on their electricity bill is going to an energy 
company in Alberta because the Saskatchewan Party has 
mismanaged the carbon capture sequestration project that they 
have been talking about for a couple of years here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again as you look at how the Saskatchewan Party has 
managed our province and have really put the stress on families, 
Mr. Speaker, we hear a lot of families from all throughout the 
province — rural Saskatchewan, in our large urban settings, in 
northern Saskatchewan as well, Mr. Speaker — of how the cost 
to house insurance, of how the cost to food, of how the cost of 
power, and all the costs that are going up, many of our families 
are just absolutely struggling. People that are working two jobs 
are finding difficulty making ends meet, and yet we see more 
and more and more tax hikes being given to families and to 
businesses, Mr. Speaker, across this province. 
 
And I say to the people of Saskatchewan, I think we’ve had 
enough of the tax-and-spend Saskatchewan Party government. 
And about the only thing that they have been consistent with, 
Mr. Speaker, is exactly what we say they’ve only been doing 
from the government benches is blaming the other parties for 
their inability to get the job done. This is quite frankly a 
one-trick pony, Mr. Speaker, that people of Saskatchewan have 
seen before. And as you look at this particular bill, what really 
irks me, Mr. Speaker, is what they refer to as a “dumb idea” of 
taxing a used car, Mr. Speaker. Here it is, 2018, the 
Saskatchewan Party government is now taxing the sale of used 
cars, something at one time that they considered “dumb.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I say to the people of Saskatchewan, you’re 
hearing from a tired old government that simply ran out of gas 
and ran out of taxpayers’ money. They’re continuing to do 
damage to our future. They’re continuing to hurt families, and 
they’re continuing to put us deeper, deeper into debt. So we 
have to pay attention to these bills that come forward to see 
what the effects are, and do not be persuaded by small offerings 
when in the larger picture, our province has got some real 
struggles in the future. And we’ve got to think differently, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’ve got to think more innovatively, and we’ve 
got to get a bit more energy into how we develop our resources, 
how we strengthen our economy, and how we begin to tackle 

the debt being left behind after a decade of Saskatchewan Party 
rule. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the future of our province and the people of 
Saskatchewan cannot afford many more years of Sask Party 
management, because all we’re seeing is debt placed upon debt 
placed upon debt. And I say to them, despite what you 
inherited, to see where we are today, it is a crying shame of how 
you squandered our future just based on one principle, and that 
is to retain power. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to have a lot more 
comments from a lot more people from across the province as it 
pertains to these challenges. So I move that we adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 128, The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 
2018. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 128, The Provincial Sales Tax 
Amendment Act, 2018. Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 121 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 121 — The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to 
participate in the debate with regards to the bills that are put 
forward, and today I’m going to add my remarks to Bill No. 
121, the cannabis control Act. Mr. Speaker, most people are 
aware that this is a new piece of legislation that’s being brought 
forward to us right now because of the fact that the federal 
government, the Liberal government, in their campaign, they 
decided to make cannabis use legalized. And so this has made 
. . . All the provinces have to come up with some legislation to 
allow for this to come forward. And so Saskatchewan actually 
is one of the last provinces to jump onto this, even though they 
knew that this was coming from 2015. 
 
So I think a lot of people have been anxious to see what this 
legislation’s going to look like, but it’s also put a lot of people 
on hold with regards to how to work through with regards to 
regulations and such, because we know that whatever decisions 
are made here on a provincial front is going to have a big 
impact on the municipal sector. And I know the municipal 
governments have been working to develop regulations within 
their sector, and SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association] and SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities] have been working with the municipal 



4016 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2018 

governments and helping them with developing legislation that 
can help with bringing this forward. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have to say that this is really important that 
we do this right. This is going to lay out how this is going to be 
brought forward within the province, and I think it’s so 
important that we ensure that everything is done properly. And 
prior to putting forward this legislation there was a survey that 
was sent out to Saskatchewan residents, and it had the highest 
participation rate for a survey in Saskatchewan, I believe. 
 
And so people in Saskatchewan are paying attention and 
watching with regards to this legislation coming forward. And I 
know my office has had multiple requests from stakeholders to 
have meetings with them, to discuss what their platform is, and 
what they would like to see us as the provincial government to 
bring forward. And I’m sure many members in this House have 
had those calls as well from community members so that they 
could have their points brought to our attention. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I feel that there’s so much to discuss with 
regards to this bill, and it’s hard to get completely prepared for 
that. I’ve been trying to digest all of the aspects of the bill and 
all the information, and so I’m going to put forward my 
remarks, but I might be jumping back and forth, and I apologize 
if it’s not completely consistent. 
 
But I do have to say before again I start some of the remarks 
with exactly what’s happening with regards to this bill, I was a 
bit disappointed to see that this budget didn’t include any 
projections for revenue or expenses as a result of the cannabis 
legislation. We know . . . Of course we don’t expect the 
government to be bang on on their numbers for the budget. The 
budget is to say, this is what we kind of expect is going to 
happen and this is what we project. 
 
So it would have been nice to see a little bit of numbers because 
a lot of people are wondering exactly how the government’s 
going to manage the expenses that are going to come forward 
with regards to the cannabis legislation. And there are going to 
be expenses, and we’re going to need to figure out how we’re 
going to manage that. And we would hope that some of the 
revenue of the cannabis sales will help with regards to the 
expenses, but it would have been nice to see what exactly this 
government is looking forward to how they’re going to 
distribute that money. 
 
And I think a lot of sectors are wondering what that’s going to 
look like. How much money is going to be distributed with 
regards to education, preventative measures, with the legal 
aspect with regulations? How much is going to be going back to 
the municipalities to help with regards to policing costs? And 
how much is going to go to health with regards to providing the 
addiction services that are going to be needed to be addressed? 
 
[15:30] 
 
And also there was no information here of the details of what 
the costing is going to be. I’m not sure if that information has 
come out in other forms of documentations, but I haven’t seen 
any information that’s labelled what the costing of this is going 
to be. And so it would be nice to get a little bit more 
information with regards to that because we know that the 

time’s ticking. I believe they previously had a July 1st start 
date, but that the federal government has pushed back on that 
date and there was, as far as I know, the last I’ve heard, there 
wasn’t an official start date presented since then. But we know 
it’s coming and we know it’s coming soon. And it would be 
nice to know a little bit about with regards to those numbers and 
how that’s going to look. 
 
Also I want to first of all start with . . . It looks like the bill is 
kind of divided into different parts and different divisions. So 
I’m going to start with part 2, the possession and distribution 
and consumption of cannabis. And I’m going to start with 
division 1, which is about minors, Mr. Speaker. And first of all 
what I want to talk about with regards to minors, we know that 
the government has set the minimum age at 19 years of age. 
And I believe that was what was the majority of people who 
participated in the survey indicated that was the number that 
they would like to see. And it kind of followed the alcohol 
consumption rules, and so that is good. 
 
But we do know that minors will consume it as well because 
they are now. And we know they do with alcohol as well, but 
we have to have perimeters so that if they are caught with 
having possession, what we would do. And it looks like there 
was some information in here to talk about if a minor has been 
found with possession of cannabis, that the fine of not more 
than $2,000 would be provided. I believe that there is an aspect 
of a fine, and also if a person is 18 years of age and older but 
not quite 19 yet, that that would be dealt with in adult court. 
 
But I think it’s really important to consider that when you’re 
penalizing minors with a monetary fine, we also have to look 
whether that fine creates more social harm, Mr. Speaker. And 
exactly how are we going to allow that youth to be able to pay 
off that fine because $2,000 is a lot of money for a youth. And I 
don’t know exactly how they would come about with that kind 
of money. 
 
And I don’t know if fine option is any longer an option, or if 
that would be what the government would look at to have that 
as a payment option because we have to look at the 
socio-economic demographic of minors who consume cannabis, 
and there may be a correlation with the low socio-economic 
status. And if we’re penalizing with a monetary fine, we are in 
turn penalizing the family unit which may in turn do more harm 
than good. 
 
So I think granted that this is the maximum allowable penalty 
and it’s discretionary. I think it’s also important that we look at 
the different aspects that we’re going to have to allow for 
people to be able to provide that payment and in what form that 
that can happen. So I think those are really important points that 
this government needs to look into. 
 
Also I want to . . . Because I have a mental health background, 
Mr. Speaker, and I know exactly the dangers of cannabis to 
especially youth brain development, I think that’s really 
important to look at as well. And so I think the best thing we 
can do with regards to that is provide the education component. 
I know when I was a kid I didn’t know how damaging cannabis 
could be to my brain. And so I would hope that we are 
providing that information to youth now because it does cause a 
lot of long-term damage and oftentimes lifetime damage. 



April 24, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4017 

I’m also worried about the fact of drug-induced psychosis. We 
know that if youth are using cannabis and using large quantities 
and for a long period of time, they could develop drug-induced 
psychosis. And already our mental health units are busy with 
managing these disorders, and if a youth also has a disposition 
to a psychiatric disorder, cannabis can expedite that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so we really, really need to be mindful of making sure that 
there’s services available. Especially we know that just because 
we’re legalizing marijuana, that because something is legalized 
does not mean that it’s good and healthy. And we need to make 
sure that we have available services there. 
 
My father was an addictions worker and he would really be 
happy to know that I’m bringing out this aspect and ensuring 
that we have addiction services and programs available. I know 
we have addiction services and programs for addictions and 
people who have charges with regards to drinking and driving. I 
wonder, has this government considered maybe having those 
types of services now for cannabis? Because we know that 
there’ll be a zero tolerance for having cannabis in your system 
and driving. And so once we do charge people with intoxication 
rates, what kind of program do we have in plan, or what kind of 
processes there are going to be to ensure that people will have 
the treatment that they need and the programs that they need to 
manage that? 
 
So I think it is only our responsibility to ensure that we think 
about that. And I think in a way this is kind of a good time to do 
that because, like, we all know cannabis is out in our 
community and people are using it. But this has given us a real 
good opportunity to sit down and think, what can we do better 
as a society to ensure that there’s programs and policies in place 
for individuals to get the treatment that they need? 
 
Also I think it’s important to identify that the Lung Association, 
they’ve been talking a lot about the issue with regards to 
cannabis use and its impact on your lungs and breathing. And I 
know the Lung Association has been doing a lot of information 
with regards to smoking but also vaping and, you know, and 
how a lot of youth have started using, like, say flavoured vaping 
or flavoured cigars and such like that, and how it’s kind of 
made it seem like it’s a treat, you know. But we’ve got to really 
be mindful of how dangerous it can be for us as well. 
 
And so I know people were . . . When I was reading about some 
of this stuff, individuals were talking about vaping of cannabis 
which also would be a concern, and so I hope that’s also being 
addressed. And I’m hoping that the government is working 
alongside with the Lung Association and also talking about the 
consequences of the legalization of cannabis and how that plays 
a part. 
 
So I believe in division 2, it’s the purchase and possession and 
distribution. So when I’m thinking about that, Mr. Speaker, one 
of the areas here that was in this bill, it indicates that legal 
cannabis must be transported straight home from the retailer, 
Mr. Speaker. And I believe that is also a rule for alcohol is that 
when you purchase alcohol you really are supposed to go from 
the distributor to your home or wherever you’re going, and 
you’re not allowed to carry it in your vehicle. 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, I think this is virtually unenforceable. Like, 
this is really putting . . . making a rule or a law that law 
enforcement are going to have a hard time to identify where the 
person purchased their cannabis or whatever they’re purchased, 
and where they’re going straight to, which residence or 
location. And so I don’t know if that was just placed in there 
because it was part of the alcohol and gaming regulations 
because as far as I believe, it says no one shall have or keep or 
consume alcohol in a vehicle. But subsection 2 provides the 
exception. It is not unlawful to have alcohol in the vehicle for 
the purpose of transporting it from the place at which it was 
lawfully obtained to a place where it can be lawfully kept or 
consumed. 
 
So usually that’s a generous interpretation to mean no open 
liquor in the vehicle, but there is an exception there so that 
individuals . . . if they were transporting it. So I think it’s 
important that we look at that too. We don’t want to make some 
laws that are virtually unenforceable and put people in a tough 
situation. So I would hope that gets looked at. 
 
Also with regards to possession, I believe that the possession is 
no more than 30 grams or having no more than four plants. If 
you possess more than that, that could lead you to a possession 
charge. I don’t know if it would be anything above the 30 grams 
or anything more than the four plants. I don’t understand what 
that would look like. But so if you had 35 grams, would you 
only be charged for the 5 grams? I don’t know. I guess those are 
good questions to ask in committee. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t really know what 30 grams of 
cannabis looks like, and so I asked individuals that I know who 
might have that information. I will not disclose that though. 
They indicated that 30 grams is 1 ounce, and 1 ounce of 
cannabis can make 60, what they call joints. And so that is quite 
a bit, I think, Mr. Speaker, so I think that was a pretty generous 
amount. 
 
But I believe that is kind of going in the same rate and fashion 
as the rest of the provinces. So I guess if that’s the direction that 
the rest of the provinces are going, that is good. But for 
someone who does not use, that seems like a lot of money or a 
lot of cannabis, I mean. 
 
So that’s all I have to speak to division 2, but division 3 is the 
consumption. And so that has been a bit more of an issue for a 
lot of people that I’ve talked to, that they found that having the 
provision that does not allow any public consumption sites, 
individuals are a little bit concerned about that. Because my 
understanding is consuming cannabis in public spaces is 
completely prohibited and so some individuals have indicated 
that prohibiting the consumption in rental properties, in 
condominiums, without the provision of an alternative public 
site will promote and increase the incident rates of people 
consuming cannabis potentially in their vehicle or in other 
places that contravenes this Act. 
 
Some individuals were wondering if there was going to be a 
process that we could have licensed cannabis consumption 
facilities as we do for alcohol. And so having licensed alcohol 
facilities is also what we have in our province. And they were 
wondering if we were going to eventually have that for 
cannabis. 



4018 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2018 

Also another area that some people found was very 
disappointing was the fact that cannabis consumption will not 
be allowed in campgrounds or provincial parks because we 
know the cannabis culture embraces nature and exploration. 
And in other provinces such as Alberta, the parks like Jasper 
and Banff are supporting cannabis use and welcoming the new 
wave of tourism to the province. So since we’re a province that 
has bountiful, beautiful lakes and amazing trails and forests, 
some people are thinking that this would be a good invitation to 
have cannabis users in the world to come and visit. So that’s 
been brought to my attention, Mr. Speaker. And so I think we 
need to look at that as well. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Another one is the division 4, is applications. So what I feel is 
really disappointing, Mr. Speaker, is that it was really 
unfortunate and I think we’ve missed a big opportunity to not 
allow local businesses to have an advantage to gain these 
business licences. I think this is a big loss of opportunity 
because we should be supporting our Saskatchewan-based 
businesses. So other people are really extremely disappointed 
that there’s a lack of preference for Saskatchewan-based 
business. 
 
It seems like there’s a current trend from this government to 
support big business and lobby them to secure positions. So we 
know that if we give this opportunity to Saskatchewan-based 
businesses that a substantial portion of the revenue shares will 
stay in Saskatchewan to benefit Saskatchewan residents. And I 
would like to see more of that, the money staying here in the 
province and being used by the people in the province here. 
 
So the application process excludes small-business industry 
experts within our province, so that’s unfortunate, and large 
corporations are monopolizing the retail industry across Canada 
with regards to the cannabis sales. And so I think Saskatchewan 
had a big opportunity here to make sure that the Saskatchewan 
businesses had a better opportunity to be providing the business 
and sales of cannabis. So I would’ve liked to see them having 
more preference. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, we have, with part 4, the administration and 
enforcement of cannabis. So we’ve got to be really mindful that 
law enforcement needs . . . They need to be mindful of both the 
medical and recreational regime of cannabis. And so a lot of 
these guidelines are going to make that difficult. And so I think 
it’s really important that we have a comprehensive approach to 
educating law enforcement. 
 
And we have a large potential here, Mr. Speaker, of human 
rights and charter rights violations, if individuals are seeing . . . 
that are using, in a medical form, are feeling that their rights are 
being violated. So we’ve got to ensure that . . . Like I was 
saying before, Mr. Speaker, that municipalities, they’re going to 
be experiencing a lot of financial expenses with regards to 
ensuring that their law enforcement officers are trained in order 
to be ensuring that the legalization of cannabis is done in the 
proper fashion. 
 
In a news article here, it indicated that the Regina Police 
Service estimates legalized marijuana will cost them 1.2 million 
in training and equipment costs. That’s a huge hit, Mr. Speaker. 

Municipalities were hit by this government in many other ways 
and are struggling. And so who’s going to be paying for those 
increased costs? Is it going to be the ratepayers in the cities? Or 
how is the province going to delegate that funding? 
 
And that’s why I indicated that it would’ve been nice to see 
some guidance within the budget with regards to this, and how 
the province is planning on supporting municipalities with this 
increase of costs. And so they indicate that it costs about 
$15,000 to send an officer for drug recognition expert training 
because it’s provided in the southern US, you know. And so 
more municipalities are wanting to get more officers trained in 
that because of this legalization coming forward. 
 
So there’s a lot of concerns with regards to the enforcement 
aspect of cannabis. And I was saying before about how the 
transportation, the rules around transportation and vehicles is 
onerous and difficult to enforce. And there’s going to be serious 
questions needed to be asked and how this will impact people. 
 
And also with the zero tolerance of intoxication, the driving 
impaired, Mr. Speaker, I agree with ensuring that we have 
drivers that are not impaired. But the fact is, is that cannabis is 
fat-soluble, and so it sits in your system for, I believe, 20 to 30 
days. And so how are you to determine that an individual has 
used it yesterday or a week ago or three weeks ago? And it 
could be still in your system. 
 
And there are some devices that will indicate how much is in 
your system, which can kind of give you a better idea of when a 
person used it. But with this zero tolerance that . . . Like so if a 
person used, they can’t drive for a month? Like how is that 
going to be managed? And so I think that could have been 
looked at a little bit better. And how is that going to be 
enforced, you know? 
 
And so I would have liked to see that with driving with alcohol 
impairment because, Mr. Speaker, we know alcohol goes out of 
your system real quickly, and maybe we need to have a zero 
tolerance for that, you know. And I would have liked to see 
that. If this minister is correct with his stance that he wants to 
get hard on drinking and driving, well you should put a zero 
tolerance for drinking and driving. 
 
So there’s a lot of questions with regards to the impaired 
driving aspect. Then we know that the legal enforcement of 
cannabis is going to be very costly. The policing costs, it seems 
to be dumped onto municipalities, and we’re either going to pay 
through provincial taxes or municipal taxes with regards to it. 
But it is ridiculous that they haven’t set aside any of the revenue 
to help with the policing costs. And so there’s a lot of 
information a person could find out about that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, a few other things I want to put on the record 
before I conclude my remarks is I think we missed a big 
opportunity to talk about the medical access of cannabis with 
regards to this. I find it extremely disappointing and short 
sighted that the provision of medical dispensaries didn’t come 
alongside with the recreational ones. 
 
We know there’s a lot of people in our province who are relying 
on the medical aspect of cannabis. And clients deserve to have 
in-person access with quality support systems in place, and we 



April 24, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4019 

should have looked into that. This will in turn make medical 
patients have to resort to getting their cannabis in a different 
form or fashion with people who might not have the knowledge 
base of the medical field of it. And I think that’s inappropriate 
to force medical patients to purchase cannabis alongside 
recreational users. It really devalues them. 
 
And so also there was nothing in here about the cannabis 
edibles. I know a lot of people are using that, especially people 
with regards to the medical aspect as well. And so I wonder if 
that will be maybe added at a later date. I guess that would be a 
good question to ask, and why that was left out of the 
legislation. So okay, so it looks like it was left out by the 
Liberal government, which I think both sides here would agree 
that they haven’t maybe gone through this process the proper 
way, and so they’ve been very frustrating to deal with. So I 
guess we’ll have to work closer with them with regards to 
ensuring that all this information is put forward. 
 
And also I think this doesn’t address what they call is head 
shops, Mr. Speaker. Like we know that in these, what they call 
head shops, they sell cannabis products that people use cannabis 
with, and they sell it to minors, the cannabis devices to minors. 
And I think that is very troubling, Mr. Speaker. And I think we 
need to do a better job with monitoring and regulation with 
regards to these businesses, and that should be addressed and 
incorporated into an Act as well. So I think minors are having 
access to this because of a lack of regulatory regime, so I think 
that’s something that’s really important that we address as well, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that concludes the remarks that I have 
with regards to this legislation. Like I said before, there seems 
to be more questions than answers. And I know there’ll be a lot 
of discussion when this comes to committee, and I know my 
colleagues have a lot more of information that they’re going to 
want to add to in regards to this bill. And I know of my 
colleague, the critic for Justice, will do a good job with regards 
to asking questions to the minister and his staff about what the 
decisions were with regards to this piece of legislation. But with 
that, Mr. Speaker, I adjourn debate for Bill No. 121, the 
cannabis control Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Prince Albert Northcote has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 121, The Cannabis 
Control (Saskatchewan) Act. Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 122 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 122 — The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2018/Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi 
intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 

Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, again it’s an honour to stand 
today to add my remarks with regards to Bill No. 121. I just had 
the opportunity to sit up and talk to Bill No. 121, the cannabis 
control Act, which it has the majority of the meat and potatoes 
with regards to these bills. And as far as I know, my 
understanding is that Bill No. 122, the cannabis control 
consequential amendments Act is, it’s just another piece of 
legislation that aligns with Bill 121 and is in for the purposes of 
changes being made so both of these bills align and the 
legislation all aligns as well. 
 
So I’m going to leave that for my remarks because I added a lot 
of information when I have my comments to Bill No. 121. So 
with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
122. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Prince Albert Northcote has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 122, The Cannabis 
Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2018. 
Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 123 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 123 — The 
Snowmobile (Fees) Amendment Act, 2018 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter into discussion here today around Bill No. 
123, The Snowmobile (Fees) Amendment Act, 2018. This bill, it 
reflects a lot of hard work of the Saskatchewan Snowmobile 
Association, Mr. Speaker, who have long played an 
instrumental role, a leadership role across our province to 
establish what are world-class trails, Mr. Speaker, and really 
unprecedented sledding or snowmobiling opportunities across 
our province. 
 
I want to recognize Chris Brewer and the CEO [chief executive 
officer] or the executive director of the Snowmobile 
Association of Saskatchewan, all others over at Sask Snow, all 
the directors, all of the volunteers that make that incredible 
organization happen, Mr. Speaker. And I want to thank them for 
their advocacy and their involvement on this bill and for 
pushing for changes to make sure that they have the revenues 
that they rightly deserve to build and support that incredible 
network of trails across our province. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Of course they work directly with the network of clubs all 
across our province. And you know, it’s really remarkable, Mr. 
Speaker, if you go on their website and look at the interactive 
map of the snowmobile trails that connect our province, it 
connects our entire province. But it’s quite the network if you 
look in from the southeast of the province all the way up 
through the northeast of the province, the central part of the 



4020 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2018 

province, right across the province. 
 
I was just visiting with the member for Carrot River casually 
behind the bar, Mr. Speaker. And of course he’s a terrible 
fisherman, but setting that aside, we were talking about the 
exceptional snowmobile trails and the networks up through his 
constituency. And I remember . . . I know many, you know, that 
support this, these trails and the training and the warm-up 
shacks, all the pieces that come together to support this 
recreation infrastructure across our province.  
 
And I think of Dwight Thesen, who I got to know a few years 
back, out of Arborfield, a real leader within the region in 
ensuring world-class snowmobiling opportunities. I think he 
was the president of the Pasquia Snow Goers in the area for 
many years, Mr. Speaker. And just listening to the passion and 
the commitment and the dedication of people like Dwight 
Thesen speaks to the incredible value that we get when we 
partner with the Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association, when 
we partner with that network of snowmobile clubs across our 
province to allow for world-class recreation. And so to Dwight 
Thesen, to the thousands of others across our province, to all 
those involved in snowmobile clubs, I say thank you. 
 
Snowmobiling of course is a good, healthy recreation for so 
many. The snowmobile association plays a vital role in ensuring 
training and safety as well, Mr. Speaker. They play an 
important role in supporting the clubs, who are not only 
maintaining trails but establishing trails, and doing it in an 
environmentally respectful and responsible fashion, Mr. 
Speaker. And of course their efforts and the efforts of 
volunteers all across our province and these clubs supports 
incredible tourism within our province as well. 
 
To spend any time up in that — well in any part of this 
province, but again I’ll single out the member for Carrot River’s 
constituency — to be throughout that region, you certainly 
identify the asset that we have in these snowmobile trails. And I 
know those that are involved in hotels, those that are involved 
in restaurants, those that are involved in all aspects of tourism 
know it very well. Certainly getting on a sled or getting on a 
snowmobile is something that I enjoy, just like so many across 
our province, and it’s something that we need to do all that we 
can to support within our province. 
 
So I want to say thank you to that incredible network of 
volunteers across our province. I really want to say thank you to 
the Saskatchewan Snowmobile Association and Chris Brewer, 
Mr. Speaker. You know, you get to know leaders like Chris 
within our community. I often see Chris and the snowmobile 
association at Agribition, Mr. Speaker, and they are usually 
there raffling off tickets to raise dollars for the snowmobile 
association. I’ve never been lucky with the tickets I’ve 
acquired, Mr. Speaker, but here’s hoping for the future. 
 
But at this point in time, I don’t have much else to say 
regarding this bill. But I would like to thank all those that are 
involved in snowmobile clubs across our province, all those 
volunteering countless hours, all those involved in Sask Snow 
itself, and all those that also support snowmobilers throughout 
our province from a tourism and from an economic perspective, 
Mr. Speaker.  
 

And again, as I singled out the member from Carrot River 
Valley, I do want to put plainly on the record, Mr. Speaker, that 
I know he’s a terrible fisherman, Mr. Speaker. And that must be 
difficult, coming from a riding and a constituency with such 
exceptional fishing. And you’d be hard pressed to try to figure 
out how could a member from Carrot River preside over a 
riding with such incredible fishing assets, Mr. Speaker, such 
incredible lakes and rivers, but be such a terrible fisherman. 
And you know, we’re all left befuddled on that front, but we 
certainly know he’s a good champion for his riding, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It’s my pleasure to enter into this discussion, and at this point I 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 123, The Snowmobile 
(Fees) Amendment Act, 2018. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 124 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 124 — The 
Environmental Management and Protection (Environmental 
Handling Charges) Amendment Act, 2018 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And as always, it is an honour to be able to rise in the Assembly 
in this beautiful Chamber and be able to be part of the debate on 
the bills and the agenda of this government as they advance 
their agenda throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had a 
bit of a break because we’ve been debating the budget in the 
last couple weeks, which is a priority motion. And so it’s kind 
of back to the usual now, Mr. Speaker, getting back to these 
bills and dealing with the business that’s in front of the House. 
Of course once we deal with them in here in the House, we’ll 
have more opportunities to speak to them in committee. 
 
And committee’s a great opportunity to, as we discussed 
recently, for committee members to ask questions of 
government officials. And the role of government officials and 
the minister in those committees is actually to give witness or 
testimony to the programs.  
 
And I think it’s important to remember that that’s the role of the 
minister in those committees, Mr. Speaker, is to provide the 
information that the committee needs in order to vote off that 
bill. And it’s kind of interesting sometimes. I think maybe 
there’s a bit of confusion about what the role of the minister is, 
and I think it’s important for us to often review the role, the 
roles that we all play in the committee process and in this 
Assembly. 
 
The bill I’m speaking to today is a fairly straightforward bill, 



April 24, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4021 

and it basically is increasing the deposits that people have to 
pay on their recyclable purchases, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s five different types of materials that are now recyclable, 
and which by law you have to pay a recycling fee for that 
purchase. Of course because we have the wonderful Sarcan 
system that we have here in Saskatchewan, you can return those 
recyclables and get your money back basically. So it’s a very 
incentive-based system for recycling. Makes a lot of sense 
because you pay upfront for the fee of the recycling, and in the 
end we have a system in place for collecting all those recyclable 
materials and moving them through the recycling stream so that 
they’re not ending up in landfills. 
 
When I think back to when I was a kid, beer bottles . . . That 
was something we did every spring, Mr. Speaker, is we would 
go out where all the beer bottles were in the ditches and we 
would collect them. And it was quite lucrative actually for 
many of us kids because our dad would drive us down the side 
of the road and we would just gather these bottles and put them 
back in the back of the truck. 
 
So we’ve been recycling beer bottles for a long, long time. I 
remember when they were stubbies, Mr. Speaker, and then the 
long-neck beer bottles came into popularity, I think in the late 
’70s or mid-’70s. I remember when Labatt’s Lite became a very 
popular beer; there was no light beer before that. So those 
recyclables have been in the system for a long, long time. 
 
But as we evolve in our consuming habits . . . I’m not sure 
evolve is the right word, but as we move along in our 
consumption habits, different materials have come to be 
valuable when it comes to recycling. And this is . . . You know, 
we need to know that materials that are being thrown out that 
do have a value, that do have a way to be recycled so that they 
can be reused again, that we have systems in place to do that. 
 
We don’t see that as much in other industries maybe, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’m thinking of methane and butane and the 
associated gases that come off the oil field, Mr. Speaker, 
because many of those . . . Even natural gas is often just burned 
or vented into the atmosphere, when it has commercial value, 
and so does butane, so does methane. But there’s no incentives 
for the oil producers to capture those valuable products — 
natural gas, butane, methane — and actually conserve it and 
then perhaps sell it on the market. 
 
So we have seen some initiatives on the part of the federal 
government in terms of methane capture, and certainly this 
government has announced recently that they are going to take 
measures to recycle that methane and to assist the oil producers 
in ensuring that they don’t just vent it into the atmosphere, 
because it’s pretty nasty stuff and the emissions that they emit 
— methane is pretty nasty. So I’m appreciative to see that this 
government is making moves to start conserving and actually 
capturing some of the methane that’s being emitted. 
 
That’s an important thing and it’s recycling, Mr. Speaker, much 
like it is when we take materials . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
much like when we recycle materials at the . . . I’m getting 
distracted, Mr. Speaker. Kind of like the materials that we take 
to the recycling at Sarcan. And again Sarcan is part of that 
complete cycle where there’s, you know, production, 

consumption, and then recycling. And Sarcan is fitting in, in 
that spot, and then we go again. Around and around we go. 
 
So what’s happening in this bill? We have The Environmental 
Management and Protection Act from 2010, is the most recent 
iteration of that bill. It’s been amended a couple of times. And 
part VI of that bill or that Act is in regard to waste management, 
and division 1 is the beverage container program. So this is 
where by statute we have the minister establishing the price that 
must be paid for those containers when you’re purchasing them. 
 
It’s curious for me to see these prices in the legislation and 
sometimes we see those types of things that, as they are 
adjusted from time to time, get moved into the regulations. But 
this is an example where it’s actually in the legislation so we 
have an opportunity to comment on that here in the House and 
the public sees the bill before it’s passed in order to get more, I 
guess, advanced warning about the changes that are being 
proposed. 
 
This change was announced by this government, I believe in 
March. March 23rd of this year there was a press release where 
there was an announcement of a number of different things that 
are being changed. Fees and changes are going to be imposed. 
Now fees and charges are a form of taxation, Mr. Speaker, that 
doesn’t really get referred to in the same way as other taxes are 
referred to, or levies. But in ’18-19 there are a number of 
changes to fees and charges that are going to add a significant 
amount of money into the government coffers, into the GRF 
[General Revenue Fund], Mr. Speaker. 
 
The environment handling charges that are being proposed in 
this bill are actually a large portion of what is being added into 
the government’s coffers this fiscal year in the budget. And of 
the total fees and charges, I think this year is $18 million more 
money coming into the government’s coffers through this 
method of taxation. Of that $18 million, I believe $10.2 million 
of that is coming from this bill alone. So it’s not an insignificant 
amount of money that is being gathered by the government 
through this bill. 
 
So what we have right now is the five types of recyclable 
materials that are, currently have the fees associated with them 
and that is: metal cans, plastic bottles, non-refillable glass 
bottles, multi-material shelf-stable containers, and paper-based 
polycoat gable top container, and I think that would be milk 
cartons. I’ve never heard them described quite so eloquently, 
Mr. Speaker, but paper-based polycoat gable top containers. So 
there’s five different types of materials. 
 
Currently for metal cans it’s 5 cents. This bill is raising it to 7. 
With plastic bottles, this is going up from 6 cents to 8 cents. 
Non-refillable glass is from 7 cents to 9 cents. Multi-material 
shelf-stable containers, I believe that’s Tetra Paks, is going up 
from 3 cents to 5 cents. And then the milk cartons are going up 
from 3 cents to 5 cents, Mr. Speaker. So it’s hard to imagine 
how an increase of 2 cents can actually generate a $10 million 
additional revenue into the GRF, but that is the numbers that 
we’re dealing with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I find it interesting that these changes to fees and levies, or fees 
and charges, this year is more than double what it’s ever been. 
And in fact it’s like 20 times higher than it was in ’14-15, the 



4022 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2018 

increases alone, Mr. Speaker. So in 2014, the extra fees that the 
government was gathering outside of the taxation system was 
about $700,000. And in ’15-16, it was just over 2 million. In 
’16-17, it dropped back down to over $541,000; ’17-18, we saw 
a huge, huge jump to $9.5 million, extra money on the existing 
fees and charges that people already paid. And this year, it was 
a whopping $18.303 million. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Now if you do the calculation in terms of how much money the 
government is clawing into the GRF just by these fees and 
charges, there’s been an increase of 2,520 per cent from ’14-15 
to ’18-19. So this is an extraordinary increase in fees and 
charges that the Saskatchewan people are being expected to 
pay. And it’s a way, I think, of gathering extra funds for a 
struggling GRF because of poor management decisions and 
misspending on other areas, Mr. Speaker. So it’s interesting to 
see this bill come the way it has. 
 
The other piece that’s in it that’s kind of interesting is the 
retroactivity. This change is retroactive to April 1st of this 
month, of 2018, and it makes very clear that you cannot go out 
and try and claim that money back if you . . . I need to make 
sure I say this right. A consumer, before April 1st or on or after 
April 1st but before this bill is assented to, from whom “. . . an 
environmental handling charge was recovered in the amounts 
imposed pursuant to the new provisions is not entitled to a 
refund from the general revenue fund of the money so paid.” 
 
So the explanatory note that explains what that is trying to do 
says that: 
 

Transitional provisions are included to make the Act and 
environmental handling charges retroactive . . . and [to] 
prevent action to recover moneys remitted for the charges 
prior to the legislation coming in to force on assent.” 

 
So right now people are paying those extra charges but the bill’s 
not in effect yet. But this says once it’s in effect, then they have 
to pay them anyways. So it’s sort of dealing with the time lag 
between April 1st and when this bill is actually assented to. 
Interesting legislative technique, Mr. Speaker, and one that, I 
think, has been used in the past for similar reasons. 
 
At any rate, that’s basically what’s in this bill. We’ll look 
forward to further discussion on it, but at this point in time, I’d 
like to adjourn debate on Bill No. 124, The Environmental 
Management and Protection (Environmental Handling 
Charges) Amendment Act, 2018. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 124. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 
Bill No. 125 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 125 — The 

Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — And I recognize you too, Mr. Speaker. No, 
I’m sorry. I shouldn’t joke about that. Anyways it is an honour 
to be able to rise today on Bill No. 125 which is The 
Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act. 
 
This is an Act that is bringing in a new tax incentive for certain 
groups. I think it would be a very limited number of groups or 
companies who are looking at getting some tax incentives for 
their business. 
 
The minister introduced this bill and had a few comments about 
it on April 23rd, so that’s not too long ago. What is this? Yes, 
yesterday. Sorry, he provided his second reading comments 
yesterday. And he’s talking about companies. He says — I’m 
just going to quote him for a second here — on page 3978: 
 

The benefit of this legislation is that it offers a 15 per cent 
non-refundable tax credit for value-added agriculture 
businesses that make a significant capital investment to 
expand production capacity . . . [And so it’s] designed to 
be used in addition to other existing incentives . . . 
 

And he says it will position Saskatchewan as having an “. . . 
attractive host of incentives for those companies . . .” I just 
always find it interesting when certain targeted businesses or 
sectors are given these types of incentives. 
 
And one that we’ve talked about a lot in this House, Mr. 
Speaker, and where I think this government dropped the ball, 
was the film employment tax credit. Now that was a refundable 
tax credit but it was one that was absolutely necessary for the 
film industry to make its way here in Saskatchewan. And so we 
talk often about picking winners and losers, and I think that’s an 
example of the Sask Party turning their back on an entire 
industry. And we still haven’t sort of sussed out what exactly 
the problem was other than the premier had an issue with the 
way the tax credit was structured. 
 
We’ve seen the results. We have an empty sound stage here in 
Regina, a world-class facility that’s now empty. We see people 
have left the province in droves that had considerable expertise 
and talent and innovation in the film industry. But simply, when 
you wipe out an industry like that, people can’t find 
employment and so they leave. And we know a number of 
people have left. So it’s really unfortunate about the choices 
that governments make that actually do incent winners and 
losers. And it seems that this value-added tax incentive is 
another one of those. 
 
And I often wonder what the policy decisions are around these 
tax incentives. And I remember talking to the former minister, 
who’s now stepped down and we’re being looked at having a 
by-election to replace him. But he talked about one tax 
incentive for the patent box. And I asked him, what sort of 
research did the government do? What sort of public, you 
know, assessments were done in terms of value for the public? 
And he says, oh no, the premier just ran into this guy in the 



April 24, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4023 

airport, and that was the impetus for bringing that tax incentive 
into legislation. So it seems like a bit of a shotgun approach. 
 
And when I ask for analysis, policy analysis on tax incentives 
and what sort of public policy goals are trying to be met or, you 
know, what is the larger picture in terms of this, it’s really 
difficult to get any sort of concrete answers about the analysis 
that was done to determine whether or not this type of tax 
incentive is appropriate. 
 
And we also heard a whole lot about transformational change a 
couple years ago, Mr. Speaker, and how that was going to 
inform everything that is being done financially here in the 
House and all the bills that are being brought forward and the 
budgeting process. And it just disappeared. We’re not talking 
about it anymore. And you have to wonder, with all the trumpet 
blowing about transformational change, where it went. It just 
kind of whimpered away. And it’s unfortunate because I know 
the chamber of commerce did a lot of work with the 
construction association about how that needed to look. 
 
And of course this is when the deficit was much, much, much 
higher than it was budgeted to be, of course, just before the 
election. So we didn’t know about all this trouble until after the 
election of course, Mr. Speaker, and that’s when these 
transformational changes were going to be put in place. But 
when I asked in committee about what’s the analysis, what’s the 
policy analysis, what is the thinking behind this, it was very 
difficult to get a sense of what thought had actually been put 
into that. 
 
I went online to find out how governments do decide which tax 
incentives and exemptions are appropriate and in what 
circumstances, and I ran across basically a report that was done 
on it. And they asked a number of questions, and these are the 
kinds of questions, I think, that need to be asked in committee. 
And certainly I would assume the Finance officials and their 
policy folks are doing these kinds of assessments. So for 
example: 
 

What is the policy objective of providing tax incentives 
and exemptions? How does a government ensure it is 
receiving value for money in providing tax incentives and 
exemptions? [And] in this context [this is a task force], 
how can the task force work to control and maximize the 
value of tax exemptions to all parties? [And] is there a 
need for principles [and] best practices in incentives and 
exemptions? 

 
And I’m just going to go to the title of this paper for Hansard’s 
purposes. This is an article or a PowerPoint called 
Transparency in the Governance of Tax Incentives and 
Exemptions and it was written by Chris Lenon, L-E-N-O-N, 
chair of the BIAC [Business and Industry Advisory Committee 
to the OECD] tax committee, 7 February, 2012, OECD 
[Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development], 
Paris. So that’s the writer of this article. 
 
Other questions that he’s asking in terms of governance of tax 
incentives is: 
 

Why do governments offer incentives and exemptions to 
investors? Should some forms of economic activity be 

incentivised? If so, how? [And] how should countries 
compete for investment and capital given that there is a 
finite supply? Which incentives [or] exemptions are most 
efficient? [And] why do investors seek investment 
agreements? 

 
So those are just a few of the questions that I hope and assume 
that our policy folks in the Finance ministry have done in order 
to determine whether this particular tax incentive, value-added 
agricultural tax incentive, is one that’s appropriate. 
 
Is it appropriate at this time? Is it appropriate in terms of 
meeting the balance that this government has to meet in terms 
of bringing revenues into the coffers and ensuring that 
investment takes place? And I’m hoping, Mr. Speaker, that this 
isn’t just another example of picking winners and losers 
because that certainly does not show a lot of foresight and a lot 
of policy analysis that’s really needed to ensure that proper 
decisions are being made when it comes to taxation incentives. 
 
And so at this point, Mr. Speaker, I haven’t spoken to the bill 
directly itself. There’s a number of different clauses that are 
added. It’s a brand new bill. It’s not amending any other bills 
although there are some amendments by virtue of the fact that 
it’s coming in. They’re calling it the . . . They’re shortening it 
down to an SVAI, Saskatchewan value-added agriculture 
incentive, and you can get certificates and you can apply for it. 
There’s quite a significant tax break that occurs if this company 
sticks around for three years or the project that’s eligible has a 
three-year life or more. 
 
So just different clauses that you would see in something like 
this: there’s applying for the certificate, conditional approval, 
review of the application, issuance of the certificate. And then 
they can claim the tax credit once the certificate has been 
issued. Then there’s a clause on change in circumstances; then a 
suspension or cancellation, of course, of the certificate, if 
needed; record keeping requirements. There’ll be inspectors 
involved and investigations can happen as well. So offences — 
penalties; recovery; limitations on prosecution which is a 
six-year limitation period. And then of course service of notice 
and documents or the regulation clause, Mr. Speaker, which is a 
long list of regulatory authorities that are being passed on to the 
Executive Council. 
 
So I know that more of our colleagues here on this side of the 
House are going to want to ask a few more questions about it, 
and certainly our critic will do a fine job in committee hopefully 
getting answers from the witnesses which are brought forward 
to provide information to the committee. So that’s what we’re 
hoping for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So at this point I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 125, 
The Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Nutana has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 125, The Saskatchewan 
Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 



4024 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2018 

Bill No. 73 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 73 — The 
Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m glad my 
friend from Weyburn is interested in this debate here today. 
That’s always, always fun when members opposite take an 
interest in what you have to say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to wade into the debate on this 
particular bill, The Insurance Amendment Act. It’s always good 
to look to the minister’s second reading speech to just have a 
sense of where the government is coming from with respect to 
the bill. You can review the bill as well, and obviously 
reviewing the bill directly tells you something, but reading the 
minister’s comments also outlines a sense of where the 
government’s coming from with respect to any particular bill. 
 
With respect to Bill No. 73, The Insurance Amendment Act, as 
the minister pointed out in his second reading comments, this 
bill was passed . . . The original bill “. . . was passed in spring 
of 2015 but has not yet been proclaimed into force.” — which is 
something I’ll talk about in a little bit as well, just proclamation 
of bills — but “It will replace The Saskatchewan Insurance Act 
and update Saskatchewan’s insurance legislation to modernize 
the regulation of the insurance industry.” So I kind of chuckled 
at that language of modernizing the insurance industry for a bill 
that was just passed three years ago, Mr. Speaker, but not yet 
proclaimed. 
 
I do have to say there is one part of the bill, I think, really 
jumped out at me and that I think is incredibly important and 
has been flagged for me. Obviously one thing that has happened 
since this bill was before us just a short amount of time ago 
was, “. . . the Supreme Court of Canada issued the Carter 
decision, and [as the minister points out] medical assistance in 
dying [or MAID] provisions were added to the Criminal Code.” 
So this particular bill, “The amendments will incorporate the 
definition of “medical assistance in dying” in the Criminal Code 
into The Insurance Act and will confirm that the section in the 
Act respecting suicide does not apply with respect to a death 
resulting from medical assistance in dying.” 

 
I know I had a conversation with someone last summer who had 
flagged this as a huge issue. He had pointed out . . . We were 
talking about the fact that, if you choose to take medical 
assistance in dying, that this boils or wraps into privacy and all 
kinds of issues. But you don’t actually have to consult with a 
loved one. It’s between you and your medical practitioner, 
which I think is important and privacy issues are important. 
 
[16:30] 
 
But this particular individual pointed out to me that the 
challenge with that is if you have a spouse or a partner who has 
decided on his or her own to accept medical insurance in dying, 
without this amendment it could have rendered insurance void, 
which for many people would be a huge issue. So you have . . . 

Let’s say you’ve got insurance on your mortgage, you’ve got 
life insurance, all those things, and so if you accept medical 
assistance in dying, your partner then would not be presumed to 
get that insurance. But this amendment fixes it. I would like to 
actually just read that particular section into the record here: 
 

The following section is added after section 8-118; 
 
8-118.1(1) In this section, ‘medical assistance in dying’ 
means medical assistance in dying as defined in section 
241.1 of the Criminal Code. 
 
(2) Section 8-118 does not apply to an insured who 
receives medical assistance in dying. 
 
(3) If a contract contains an undertaking, express or 
implied, that insurance money will be paid if a person 
whose life is insured receives medical assistance in dying, 
the undertaking is lawful and enforceable. 
 
(4) For the purposes of this Act, if an insured receives 
medical assistance in dying, that insured is deemed to have 
died as a result of the illness, disease or disability for 
which he or she was determined to be entitled to receive 
that assistance, in accordance with clause 241.2(3)(a) of 
the Criminal Code”. 

 
So I’m very happy to see this in place, but I am curious how 
long it’ll take once this bill passes, as most bills that come 
before us in the spring session pass not long after. I would like 
. . . I’m wondering in committee when the Justice critic . . . or 
I’m actually not sure which critic will be responsible for this, 
Mr. Speaker, but we’ll ask those questions around proclamation 
and a bill coming into force. 
 
It’s interesting to me the issue of MAID [medical assistance in 
dying] flagged in this particular insurance, or in this insurance 
Act, is interesting to me as the Health critic, Mr. Speaker. I 
have spoken to people who have very strong feelings about it on 
either side, but I do know if you have medical assistance in 
dying, the other piece, the other side of the coin that is 
absolutely imperative is to have a strong palliative care system 
so people actually feel like they have options when they’re sick 
and in pain and suffering and need to have that pain controlled 
and managed. So I think this is a good change and an important 
change, really important change in The Insurance Act, to make 
sure that if someone chooses medical assistance in dying that 
his or her loved ones have access to the insurance that they’ve 
paid for. 
 
And on the flip side of the coin, making sure that people have 
access . . . I’m sorry. This has been a tough slog here with my 
throat for the last several weeks. 
 
People need to have access to palliative care. They need to have 
it in hospital. They need to have it in long-term care settings. 
Long-term care settings, for all intents and purposes, are 
palliative care settings. I know in a conversation with a former 
minister of Health, I remember some numbers that he had 
shared with me. I think the average length of time that 
someone’s in long-term care actually is about 18 months from 
the time they arrive until they pass away, which is also 
interesting to me, thinking about my grandmother who spent 



April 24, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4025 

two decades I think in long-term care. So times sure have 
changed, or the level of care in long-term care has increased 
quite dramatically over the years. 
 
I just was speaking and working with a family last week, an 
ALS [amyotrophic lateral sclerosis] patient, and working with 
the ALS Society about issues around palliative care and 
palliative home care in particular. And this is important, very 
important, particularly in rural Saskatchewan, making sure 
people have access to the supports they need to be able to stay 
home. It’s better for the person, but it’s also ultimately better 
for the system because an acute care bed is very expensive. 
 
But I mean, the most important thing is making sure that people 
have the opportunity to live their final days and have a good 
death. That is, from all the literature I’ve read, from the people 
who work in this area in palliative care, having a good death, 
for the individual who is ill — as well as loved ones — is a 
really important piece, Mr. Speaker. So although this particular 
bill solves the issue around insurance, I would argue that this 
government has a long way to go in ensuring people have 
access to palliative care. 
 
I was happy to know that they were spending some of the 
federal dollars this last budget on sort of a last-minute training 
lots of people. I can’t remember. It’s not at the tip of my 
tongue, the name of the program, the palliative care program. 
But making sure people have the skills in palliative care, Mr. 
Speaker, that is I think something positive the government has 
been doing in this regard. But there’s a lot more work to do, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some of the other change with The Insurance Amendment Act, 
2017, so I’ve talked about the new section that addresses 
medical assistance in dying. There’s also a new section added 
that allows for more recovery options for victims of 
interpersonal violence. And there’s some housekeeping changes 
as well. 
 
There’s a new definition for “unlicensed insurer” which is 
pretty basic. The new definition is, “‘unlicensed insurer’ does 
not include any insurer that is exempt from the requirement to 
be licensed pursuant to this Act.” 
 
It adds a new subsection, makes it a requirement for licensed 
applicants to comply with regulations. There are changes to 
ensure that a managing general agent or third party 
administrator can only act on behalf of an insurer if they hold 
an appropriate licence, and it includes some changes to the 
penalties associated with insurance licensing. 
 
Again I think that these . . . for all intents and purposes, a good 
bill. And I know when our critic gets to committee, there will 
be many questions asked of the minister. And I think again . . . I 
mentioned this at the beginning of my remarks. This first bill 
was passed in 2015. And it’s always interesting to me, where I 
talk to stakeholders or other organizations who have an interest 
in a particular piece of legislation, and they’re told by 
government, oh well we’re not going to open up the Act for a 
while. We’re reviewing the Act. It could be years. 
 
But in my time, almost nine years, Mr. Speaker, in this 
legislature, particularly in the last few years, there’s been 

several bills that have come before this House that have been 
before the House on multiple occasions to fix things that have 
been forgotten or missed. 
 
And you know, I’m a big believer in . . . I think the minister 
talked about ongoing consultations with insurance providers. 
And I’m a big believer in staying connected to stakeholders and 
knowing what’s going on and what the impacts — direct and 
the unintended consequences — are of any legislation. But it’s 
interesting to me how some legislation, if the government and 
the political will isn’t there, it can take a long time to get 
legislative changes to happen. And in other cases bills come 
before us many times in a short period of time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think one other thing I just want to comment on. I’ve never 
been in government, and I know that sometimes governments 
choose not to proclaim bills that they’ve passed for a number of 
reasons. And this bill had not yet been proclaimed. 
 
It reminds me of another bill actually that’s relevant to 
conversations we were having earlier today. In 2015, we passed 
The Human Tissue Gift Act in 2015 that actually facilitated 
organ donation, being able to set up mandatory referral 
throughout the province. It was a good bill, and people in the 
organ and tissue donation world . . . I know the government 
who worked with them to try to figure out how we change our 
abysmal organ donation rates. And so I’m eager to get to my 
Health estimates committee, because last spring I was told that 
that bill hadn’t been proclaimed yet and wasn’t in force. So I’m 
hoping for different information. 
 
And now the minister has announced a point five position, 
donor physician position, which I might add is far less than we 
need here in Saskatchewan. We look at Ontario that is 120 
times the number of donation physicians — 120 times. They’ve 
got 58 donor physicians in Ontario and have some of the best 
rates in the country, but they’ve done that very purposefully and 
diligently by implementing best practices. So hopeful to hear in 
estimates that this human tissue gift Act has been proclaimed, 
and I am eager to hear a little bit more about organ donation. 
 
But with respect to Bill No. 73, The Insurance Amendment Act, 
I’m glad to see this change around medical assistance in dying 
is happening. And I look forward to the critic getting some 
further answers about a few issues in committee. But with that, 
with Bill No. 73, I would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 73, The 
Insurance Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 83 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 83 — The 
Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 



4026 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2018 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter into discussion as it relates to Bill No. 83, The 
Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 
2017. This relates to a very important area within our province, 
Mr. Speaker — the protection of our environment or natural 
environment, Mr. Speaker; the protection of our incredible 
lakes and rivers, Mr. Speaker; the protection of our habitat, Mr. 
Speaker; the prairie landscapes that are such an asset within our 
province but also at risk, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see a government that, far too often in the Sask Party, just 
doesn’t have time to provide practical, pragmatic leadership 
with respect to the environment, Mr. Speaker. And far too often 
they’re placing things like our natural habitat in our lakes and 
our rivers at risk, Mr. Speaker. And this is something that binds 
our province together. 
 
And I think of water, Mr. Speaker. The value that Saskatchewan 
people — rural, urban, indigenous — place on water, Mr. 
Speaker, is something that really should unite us. And it’s 
disappointing time and time again to have a Sask Party 
government that gives passing interest to the importance of 
protecting our land and air and water, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see changes that are brought forward here in this bill, and 
we’ll consult on this bill, but changes that certainly decrease 
accountability of a government, Mr. Speaker, that should be 
increasing accountability on every front. We see changes here 
on how those are appointed to the Saskatchewan environment 
code advisory, and the change that makes this less transparent, 
Mr. Speaker, now under the full control of the minister with 
changes of the bill, as opposed to a level of public transparency 
to the people of the province by way of the traditional process 
of being appointed by order in council. And we see this erosion 
of transparency, this erosion of accountability from the Sask 
Party government on so many fronts. 
 
Now as it relates to those good people that put their names 
forward to serve on the advisory board with respect to that 
code, I say thank you. And I say thank you to all those people 
across our province who, whether from an employment 
perspective or from those that volunteer, that work to protect 
our environment across our province. 
 
I also recognize that there’s a change here within this legislation 
that eliminates references to human health. And we’ll want to 
get more around waterways and water that’s being supplied. We 
want to get a lot more information on that front. Certainly the 
quality of our water is critical. 
 
Human health should be front and centre, and it does remind me 
as well that we live in a time across our province where we 
have so many communities, so many people who are subjected 
to boil water advisories, Mr. Speaker, so many of them being 
indigenous communities, Mr. Speaker. And you know, from our 
perspective — the New Democrats, the official opposition — 
it’s past time that we step up to the plate and act to ensure safe 
water for all across our province. 
 
There’s measures that have been brought forward here to deal 

with those that are bringing in beverage containers from other 
provinces and redeeming them within our system here, and that 
seems to be probably a reasonable measure. We’ll see, we’ll 
assess its effectiveness as to what’s been brought forward. But 
certainly I’d want to thank and recognize all those involved in 
Sarcan and in recycling all across our province. 
 
[16:45] 
 
We really do have a special model and one that can be held out 
as a best practice within our province. And we want to certainly 
make sure that any legislation and any actions of government 
supports all those good people in all those organizations on the 
ground that are working hard from an environmental 
perspective. And I say thanks to all those directly involved now 
and for many years with Sarcan. 
 
When we look at matters of the environment, I see, certainly 
within this bill . . . And I just looked at it for a little bit of time; 
we’ll be engaged with stakeholders across our province. But 
certainly we don’t see any action with respect to dealing with 
the Quill lakes, Mr. Speaker, and in all the lands that have been 
lost, Mr. Speaker, all the lands that have been impacted by the 
high mineral content, the high saline salt content within that 
water, Mr. Speaker, and all the good producers in that region 
that have been directly impacted by the rising water and directly 
impacted by the failure of leadership by the Sask Party and the 
inaction by the Sask Party on this front. 
 
And we recognize that this is a government that hasn’t stepped 
up to the plate for many years to deal with this crisis in the way 
that they need to and provide some leadership, and have then 
always rushed to sort of quick, short-circuited processes, Mr. 
Speaker, that are absent of passing an environmental test, Mr. 
Speaker, that gives the public confidence. And I just implore 
this government to put some time and attention to the matters of 
the Quill lakes and to make sure that we can relieve the pressure 
on those producers in that region, that we address the threat that 
exists of those waters reaching those banks, and that we do it in 
a way that ensures that we’re protecting downstream 
watersheds as well. 
 
This is a government that has now twice tried to rush a process 
forward without due diligence, without an environmental 
assessment to divert waters from this region down through the 
Qu’Appelle Valley watershed, directly into the northern part of 
Last Mountain Lake, a world-class spawning ground, Mr. 
Speaker. And Saskatchewan people — whether they be rural 
residents or producers or whether they be those that enjoy the 
lake, fishers within our province, whether they’re those in the 
cities or anywhere else — expect so much more from our 
government, and they certainly recognize what’s at risk. 
 
And you know, I’ve been observing in the last number of days 
the amount of attention that was given to Bill Boyd and his 
irrigation sprinkler project, Mr. Speaker, his irrigation 
immigration scheme, Mr. Speaker, and the fact that this 
individual, prominent individual in government who is scandal 
plagued on front after front after front, had the resources of 
government at his disposal, it would seem. 
 
The fact that we had the deputy minister to the Premier directly 
involved in these activities, the deputy minister to the . . . well 



April 24, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4027 

the now Premier but the then minister of the Environment, Mr. 
Speaker, I find it, you know, I find it certainly inappropriate 
that an individual with that sort of position was getting that sort 
of attention with his immigration irrigation scheme, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I thought to myself as I was looking at all those meetings, 
and I thought to myself as we saw the streams of emails where 
deputy ministers were coming together, that if that was the kind 
of attention that would have been provided to the Quill lakes, 
Mr. Speaker, we would have probably resolved that matter. 
 
And instead this was a government that was caught up with 
their political friend, the minister who was plagued by scandal 
after scandal, Mr. Speaker, the minister who’s now been . . . I 
guess pled guilty, Mr. Speaker, to charges under our 
environmental protections. 
 
But it takes us away a little bit from the bill, but I did find it 
disappointing to see nothing in this bill to indicate protection of 
our watershed and actions around the Quill lakes, Mr. Speaker, 
and resolving this matter in a way that protects the watersheds 
downstream, the Qu’Appelle Valley lakes, Last Mountain Lake, 
the Qu’Appelle Valley watershed, and agricultural land in 
between, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also see within this code no attention at all to the important 
action we should be taking when it comes to the generation of 
renewable power across Saskatchewan, distributing that 
generation all across our province, working with homeowners 
and businesses and First Nations and farms and municipalities 
all across our province, and municipalities, Mr. Speaker, to 
generate power across our province, create jobs, drive 
investment at this very important time, and of course, 
importantly, reduce emissions, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s this sort 
of prairie progressive leadership that Saskatchewan people are 
looking for, Mr. Speaker, and it’s absent with this Sask Party 
government. 
 
We also see no action and no leadership when it comes to 
energy efficiency retrofits across the province. And here, just 
like renewable power, we have an incredible opportunity for a 
government to work as a partner and to set the regulatory 
environment in a way that will allow the creation of thousands 
of jobs to drive investment across our province and to work 
again, certainly, with public buildings and municipalities, but 
importantly with homeowners and with businesses and with 
industry and farms and First Nations all across our province. 
 
And that leadership is needed right now within our province. 
We need it from an environmental perspective, Mr. Speaker. 
But very importantly on these practical sorts of solutions, we 
need it from an economic perspective, an opportunity to act 
from an environmental perspective but create jobs across our 
province, needed jobs across our province. And certainly 
supporting entrepreneurs and businesses all across our province, 
driving investment, growing our economy once again, Mr. 
Speaker — something that’s really been threatened by the 
actions of the Sask Party of late. 
 
Within the bill as well there’s some measures around waterways 
that I read. I worry, Mr. Speaker, that this is just a further 
erosion of the protection of those waterways and the lakes and 

rivers that we cherish all across our province, Mr. Speaker, the 
lakes and rivers that so many people and so many communities 
and so much life depends on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I see within this bill, I don’t see any measures around a 
comprehensive water management plan, something that’s sorely 
needed within our province to assess the quantity, the 
downflow, the flow of our water into our province and the 
adequacy of that supply, the commitments that have been made 
from an industrial perspective, making sure that we’re 
balancing those obligations and planning for the long term. And 
importantly of course, that we’re assessing the quality of that 
water, monitoring that water and putting in place all the 
measures that are required to protect watersheds across our 
province. 
 
Through this legislation, I don’t see any changes to protect 
wetlands within our province, to act on illegal drainage, Mr. 
Speaker, and to recognize the devastating consequences of 
illegal drainage within our province and of wetland degradation 
across our province. And this is a perfect space once again to 
work with the stewards of the land, Mr. Speaker — the 
producers across Saskatchewan, the farmers across 
Saskatchewan, the landowners across Saskatchewan — to 
protect and to establish wetlands, Mr. Speaker. Making sure 
that we have that natural capacity to manage water in this 
province, but also to make sure that we support those wetlands 
and all the life that they support within our province. 
 
Of course we see a Sask Party that’s going in the opposite 
direction when it comes to the environment, so often out of 
touch with the reality of the world around us. So often, it would 
appear, to deny climate change, Mr. Speaker. And so neglectful 
when it comes to the practical kinds of steps that Saskatchewan 
people should expect of their government. 
 
I think of the native prairie grasslands within this province, the 
incredible grasslands, Mr. Speaker, that certainly sustain life all 
across our province, that play such a vital role from an 
agricultural perspective as well. And so much of that being 
threatened and sold off by the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker, putting 
up large blocks of land that have native prairie grassland up for 
sale, Mr. Speaker. And if you can imagine, on the auction 
website for these lands, Mr. Speaker — public lands — actually 
having them listed in American dollars, Mr. Speaker, when the 
last time I checked we still had laws in place that made sure that 
it was Canadians, Mr. Speaker, that were buying farm land in 
this province. 
 
And it speaks to the kid gloves that I’ve seen from this 
government in dealing with the question of the foreign illegal 
purchase of farm land across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, a 
question that the people deserve answers to. And I know they 
deputized the minister a couple years back and I think they 
looked at, you know, one land purchaser or two, but the reality 
across . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I realize that we’re getting near 
perhaps a recess or adjournment, but it is getting pretty noisy in 
here, and currently the member from Regina Rosemont has the 
floor. I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — And it speaks again to the neglect of this 



4028 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2018 

government to enforce the Act, Mr. Speaker, enforce the laws 
right now that we need to make sure that those acquiring land 
are doing so with, you know, Canadian capital, Canadian 
dollars, that they’re Canadian residents, Mr. Speaker. And far 
too often we’ve watched the Sask Party, you know, turn away 
from putting a spotlight on this very real challenge that 
Saskatchewan people have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I say, you know, this is a government going in the 
opposite direction. Instead of protecting our native prairie 
grasslands, Mr. Speaker, putting them up for sale, putting them 
up on a, you know, website, Mr. Speaker, in American dollars, 
when the actual sale of those lands . . . well for one, they 
shouldn’t be occurring. We should be protecting our native 
prairie grasslands. But secondly, it would be illegal, Mr. 
Speaker, to be selling them to Americans or anyone else, Mr. 
Speaker. And we have within this province world-class 
producers, and those stewards of the land who deserve to have a 
partner in their government. And far too often we just . . . that’s 
just simply not the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this piece of legislation, we will pull it apart and work with 
stakeholders. And I thank all those that work across our 
province to ensure environmental protection across our 
province, all those working in recycling efforts, in Sarcan as 
well, Mr. Speaker, all the producers who go out of their way for 
the large part, Mr. Speaker, to be the best stewards of our land. 
 
And I implore government to finally step up to the plate and to 
start to step up to the realities that we’re facing within our 
province, to bring forward practical prairie solutions, Mr. 
Speaker, that would create jobs, drive investment, work with 
producers and farms and First Nations all across our province to 
create jobs, reduce emissions, and protect that incredible natural 
environment. 
 
The generation that we’re responsible to will be looking to us to 
say well, what did you do in this period of time? What did you 
do when we knew that there needed to be action to protect our 
natural environment, to act on climate change in responsible 
ways? And I think we owe it to them to say that we did 
everything we could, Mr. Speaker. And that’s simply not the 
case. 
 
We certainly will engage through the committee process with 
the minister. Our Environment critic will be asking many 
questions. We’ll be seeking clarity around who’s been 
consulted on this front. We’ll be bringing forward the 
perspective of so many partners in conservation, so many 
partners from an environmental perspective across our province, 
and making sure that we take the practical steps that we need to 
now to ensure we’re protecting future generations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But at this point in time as it relates to Bill No. 83, I’ll adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 83, The Environmental 
Management and Protection Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I move 
that, so committees may do work this evening, that this House 
do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that the House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Support and Condolences for Toronto 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3997 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3997 
 Release of Embargoed Information 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3998 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 3997 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3998 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3998 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3999 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3999 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3999 
  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 3999, 4009 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3999 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4000 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 4000 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4000 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4000 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4000 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4000 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4001 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4001 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Organ and Tissue Donation Awareness Week 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4001 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4002 
 Recognizing Volunteer Firefighters 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4002 
 Community Leaders Attend United Nations Session  
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4002 
 4-H Public Speaking Competition 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4002 
 Invitational Basketball Tournament 
  Goudy ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4003 
 Doctor of Philosophy Graduate Develops Valuable Tool 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4003 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Former Member and Irrigation Project Approval Process 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4003 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4003 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4004 
 Availability of Government Officials 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4006 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4006 
 Graduation Rates of First Nations and Métis Students 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4007 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4007 
 Social Services for First Nations and Métis Children 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4007 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4007 
 Organ and Tissue Donation Physicians 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4007 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4008 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Deferred Ruling 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4008 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4008 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 126 — The Energy Export Act 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4008 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4010 
 Bill No. 127 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4012 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4013 
 Bill No. 128 — The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2018 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4014 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4014 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 121 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4015 
 Bill No. 122 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2018 
 Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4019 
 Bill No. 123 — The Snowmobile (Fees) Amendment Act, 2018 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4019 
 Bill No. 124 — The Environmental Management and Protection  
 (Environmental Handling Charges) Amendment Act, 2018 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4020 
 Bill No. 125 — The Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4022 
 Bill No. 73 — The Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4024 
 Bill No. 83 — The Environmental Management and Protection Amendment Act, 2017 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4026 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


