


















































May 9, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 56A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 9, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4249 
 May 9, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and all members of the Legislative Assembly, I’d 
like to welcome in the west gallery today the grade 10 students 
history class from Melville Comprehensive School. I’d also like 
to mention at this time that Melville Comp rocked in the Sask 
school trades competition as well held in the province. 
 
They’re led today by a teacher and also a city of Melville 
councillor, Andrew Rondeau, who has brought numerous 
classes through the legislature, and Dan Alspach. I’d like to 
welcome the Melville Comp students to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you to all members of the House, I want to 
introduce several guests that are here, present to raise issues. 
They go informally by the title Transportation for All. It’s a 
community group that has been meeting regularly to discuss 
transportation issues, particularly for people with disabilities, 
but for all of us it’s a major issue. 
 
I want to introduce the folks that are on the floor of the gallery, 
and I hope I get everyone: Charlene Eger and Tina Millar and 
Terri Sleeva, Heatherdawn Caswell, Jaime Ellis. And as well, 
up in the west gallery we have Catherine Robertson, Shelly 
Alderson, Judy Winship, Shane Haddad, Martin Wooldridge, 
JoAnn Jaffe, Shannon O’Toole, Dylan Morin, Florence 
Stratton, Tennille Richard — or maybe Tennille’s on the floor, I 
think; she’s down here, right — and George Wooldridge. And I 
hope I got everyone. 
 
Also a special shout-out I want to say to Tina and Shane. I 
know them from People First as well, a very strong organization 
that’s been meeting for several years. So I would ask all 
members to give a warm welcome to these folks to their 
legislature.  
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join the member from Saskatoon Centre in welcoming the 
Transportation for All group that are seated here on the floor 
with us, and up in the gallery. And I just want to welcome them 
to their Legislative Assembly and thank them for all the work 
that they do on behalf of the people that they represent. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 
support of mental health and addiction services in the North. 
Northern Saskatchewan has some of the highest suicide rates in 
the country. The Children’s Advocate has put out a report 
stating the lack of services in the North. The suicide rate is six 
times higher for First Nation boys than non-First Nation boys 
between the age of 10 and 19; and 26 times higher for First 
Nation girls than non-First Nation girls. 
 
I will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to treat northern Saskatchewan 
residents with respect and dignity and to immediately 
invest in more mental health and wellness programs and 
facilities in the North. 

 
It is signed and supported by many good people of northern 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Regina, and 
Esterhazy. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for the restoration of public 
intermunicipal transportation for persons with disabilities. And 
the people signing this petition, and many are here today, want 
to bring to our attention the following: that the cruel and 
heartless Sask Party government budget of 2017 cut public 
intermunicipal transportation services for persons with 
disabilities, including all people with various abilities. This 
decision left persons with disabilities stranded and isolated in 
both urban and rural communities; and that since cutting the 
transportation services for persons with disabilities, the Sask 
Party government has failed to replace this service in any 
meaningful way. 
 
We know that the Sask Party government failed to perform an 



4250 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2018 

audit of their decision and do not fully understand the economic 
and social costs of cutting STC [Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code states that 
“Access to equal, dignified transportation is essential to the 
achievement of equality for persons with disabilities.” And it 
also goes on to say that “Persons with disabilities have a human 
right to adequate, dignified public transportation services on an 
equal basis.” The code guarantees the right to equal treatment 
with respect to services without discrimination based on 
disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately restore 
public intermunicipal transportation services for persons 
with disabilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today come from 
the city of Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition calling on the Sask Party government to restore the 
rental housing supplement. These citizens wish to bring to your 
attention that the Sask Party’s elimination of the rental housing 
supplement hurts low-income families and people with 
disabilities; that those who currently receive the supplement 
have had no assurance that a change in circumstance won’t lead 
them to lose their supplement; that this cut comes after previous 
cuts to the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] 
program that have already affected hundreds and left people 
living with disabilities with fewer supports; and that rents 
remain unaffordably high since the cost of living has increased 
significantly in the last decade while social services benefits 
have remained unchanged. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to immediately restore the 
Saskatchewan rental housing supplement. 

 
This petition is signed by individuals from Moose Jaw, Regina, 
and Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
to present a petition today calling on the Sask Party government 
to appoint a seniors’ advocate. The petitioners point out that for 
too long the concerns of Saskatchewan seniors have not been a 
priority of this government. They point out that many Sask 
Party cuts directly impact seniors, like the cut to STC, like the 
hearing aid plan cut, the increases in drug costs, increases in 
long-term care fees just to name a few, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The petitioners point out that Saskatchewan does not have 
legislated minimum care standards in our long-term care 
facilities. And even with the government’s continued reports, 
and concerns from families and employees in facilities on the 
issues in long-term care, the government has failed to ensure 
safety, quality of life, and dignity for seniors. And they also 
point out that other provinces have seniors’ advocates who 
successfully work to ensure seniors have the supports they need 
and deserve. They point out that a seniors’ advocate would 
provide vital support for seniors and their families across the 
province. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to immediately appoint a seniors’ 
advocate to ensure the rights of seniors are upheld and that 
all seniors across the province have the supports they need 
and deserve. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of Regina. 
I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Land Donation Provides Conservation Legacy 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, like many aging landowners in 
Saskatchewan, Robert and Shirley Gordon were faced with a 
difficult decision about their land. For the Gordons, my 
constituents of Saskatoon Centre, it boiled down to two basic 
options: continue cultivating the land or connect it to a greater 
purpose. 
 
Looking out onto the seas of cultivated land that dominate 
Saskatchewan’s landscape, Robert felt moved to do the latter. 
He said, when you look around and see these little fragments of 
prairie being broken up you think, no, I have to do something. 
And he had an opportunity to do something. 
 
The land is now transformed into a wildlife sanctuary. They 
planted natural vegetation, added trees, and built a dam. Robert 
and Shirley created their own little oasis on the prairie. Yet, 
they knew as they aged that they would not be able to hold on 
to this land forever. The Gordons decided to place their land in 
the hands of conservation. The Gordons contacted the 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation, who have a proven track 
record in land conservation and, on January 27, 2017, their 
dream became a reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation Habitat 
Trust foundation was established in 1978. To date, they have 
protected over 65,000 acres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in thanking the 
Gordons for their generosity in helping biodiversity here in 
Saskatchewan for generations to come, and as well recognizing 
the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation for the outstanding 
leadership in this truly critical area of land conservation. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 



May 9, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4251 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Early Childhood Educators Appreciation Day 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
stand to recognize today as Early Childhood Education Day. On 
this day, we show recognition to the thousands of early 
childhood educators across this province who contribute to the 
physical, emotional, spiritual, and intellectual development of 
our children. 
 
Optimizing the early years of children’s lives is one of the best 
investments we can make as a society in ensuring their future 
success. Mr. Speaker, we understand that the quality of early 
childhood education is crucial to the overall development of a 
child and the adult they will become. I’m proud of this 
government’s record when it comes to early childhood 
education. Since 2007 we have seen an increase of 6,839 new 
child care spaces, a 73 per cent increase. We have also chosen 
to invest over $100 million in the early years in this year’s 
budget, the largest budget in the history of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so many lives have been positively impacted by 
the work of early childhood educators. They often wear many 
hats and might not always receive credit when it is due, and to 
them I say thank you. I ask everyone in this Assembly to join 
me in thanking early childhood educators and all they do for our 
children across Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Mental Health Week 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, May 7th to 13th 
marks the Canadian Mental Health Association’s Mental Health 
Week, an annual event that encourages Canadian people to 
reflect on all issues related to mental health. However, Mr. 
Speaker, reflecting is simply not enough. That’s why the theme 
for this year’s Mental Health Week is Get Loud. 
 
Mental health is about more than mental illness. One in five 
Canadians live with mental health problems, mental illness, or 
addiction. But the reality is, five in five of us have mental 
health, just like we all have physical health. We can all benefit 
from celebrating, promoting, and acknowledging the role that 
good mental health plays in living a full and meaningful life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is amongst the lowest of provinces 
funding mental health services as a percentage of the health 
budget. We have the lowest number of psychiatrists per capita 
in Western Canada, and our lack of access to proper mental 
health care in our rural and remote communities has led to a 
tragic and preventable epidemic of suicides in the North. 
 
This is why, Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Mental Health 
Association is encouraging Canadians to get loud by writing to 
their government representatives, speaking out on social media, 
and donating their time or money to mental health services. By 
using our voices, we can help create change and build mental 
health support for people across Canada, and here at home in 
Saskatchewan. 

[13:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in recognition of 
National Mental Health Week, and in getting loud, raising 
awareness, and creating change for those suffering with mental 
health issues here in our province. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for The Battlefords. 
 

Aquatic Invasive Species Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. May 6th to 12th is 
Aquatic Invasive Species Awareness Week. It’s aimed to 
educate our residents and the visitors to raise awareness of the 
risks to our province’s water bodies. 
 
Saskatchewan has thousands of beautiful lakes and rivers and is 
a popular place for tourists and residents to enjoy fishing and 
other water-based activities. These activities are dependent on a 
healthy aquatic ecosystem. Aquatic invasive species, or AIS, 
such as zebra and quagga mussels pose a serious threat to lakes 
and waterways in Western Canada. 
 
Invasive mussels and other AIS can be impossible to eliminate 
if they become established in a water body and can cost 
millions of dollars to manage. 
 
Prevention is the most effective solution to AIS. This week and 
all year long, we want to continue to raise awareness and 
educate boaters, anglers, and other recreational water users to 
clean, drain, and dry boats, watercraft, fishing gear, and water 
equipment. The Environment ministry purchased and will 
deploy six mobile watercraft decontamination units around the 
province to support our inspection and decontamination 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education and awareness on aquatic invasive 
species is the foundation of our prevention program, and we use 
Aquatic Invasive Species Awareness Week as an opportunity to 
engage the public. Through these efforts, Saskatchewan 
residents and visitors can continue to enjoy the abundant 
aquatic resources our province has to offer, and we are helping 
to ensure these resources are protected for our future. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar-Sask 
Valley. 
 

Opening of Rosthern District Food Bank 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 20th I had 
the pleasure of attending the grand opening celebration of the 
new Rosthern District Food Bank on behalf of our Premier. The 
RDFB has been providing emergency food relief to families 
within Rosthern and the surrounding communities since 2011. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thanks to a recent donation and extensive 
community-driven renovation to the historic Valley News 
building in Rosthern, a larger food bank with increased space is 
now ready to operate. This multi-purpose building has an 
increased storage space, a new kitchen that can host cooking 
classes, as well as areas to prepare and serve meals which can 
be enjoyed in the new dining space. This room can also be used 



4252 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2018 

as a classroom and will hold weekly indoor market events 
where entrepreneurs can sell food, plants, crafts, and much 
more. 
 
Local food banks are so much more than just a resource for 
food. They serve as a space for cities and towns to come 
together, lend a hand, and grow as a community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that members please join me in thanking 
Nadine Ens, community catalyst for the RDFB, and Wilmer 
Froese, a board chairperson to the RDFB, for their hard work on 
the grand opening of this new food bank, as well as the 
community of Rosthern and surrounding area for their 
continued support over the years to this program. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Kindersley. 
 

Kindersley Brothers Excel in Hockey 
 
Mr. Francis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to acknowledge the achievements of two exceptional 
hockey players from Kindersley. The Close brothers, Braden, 
23 and Justen, 20, have both seen immense success in hockey 
over the years and this past season has been no exception. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for several generations the Closes have been a 
very successful sporting family. But for Braden, following that 
path has been significantly more challenging. Braden was born 
with spina bifida, a birth defect which leaves many quite 
debilitated, but not Braden, Mr. Speaker. Many of us in 
Kindersley have watched him battle and conquer that fight, and 
for many years Braden has competed in several sports alongside 
his classmates and friends. And arguably, no one works harder 
than Braden Close. 
 
Braden’s determination and dedication first began to pay 
dividends when the sledge hockey program came to our 
community over a decade ago. To say Braden excelled in this 
sport is quite an understatement. He has won two national 
championships with Team Alberta and most recently has been 
named to Canada’s National Para Hockey Development Team. 
 
Justen, star backstop for the SJHL [Saskatchewan Junior 
Hockey League] Kindersley junior Klippers, was not to be 
outdone by his older brother this year. He has also had a great 
season himself, sharing the SJHL Top Goaltender Award, 
leading the league in games played and minutes played. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
Close family on their success and wish them the best as they go 
forward proudly representing our hometown, our province, and 
our nation. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Martensville-Warman. 
 

Prairie Sky Chamber of Commerce  
Business Excellence Awards 

 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know, the 
cities of Warman and Martensville have grown exponentially 
over the last few years, and the number of businesses have also 
grown. A few years ago the chambers in Warman and 

Martensville joined forces and created Prairie Sky Chamber of 
Commerce because their businesses really do serve the whole 
area. 
 
It was an honour to attend the Prairie Sky’s Business 
Excellence Awards on Friday along with my colleagues from 
Saskatoon University and Saskatoon Westview. Steve McLellan 
and Shawna Nelson of the Saskatchewan chamber did a great 
job emceeing this exciting evening. 
 
The quality of the nominees speaks to the many amazing 
businesses in my constituency. And there have to be winners, 
and the winners are Non-Profit of the Year, Martensville 
Community Recreation Project. Community Involvement award 
went to Affinity Credit Union. Customer Service winner was 
Finelite Photography in Warman. New Business of the Year 
was Santosha Yoga and Wellness Therapy in Warman, and the 
Business of the Year was SAS Home and Floral Boutique in 
Martensville. The owners are sisters who were inspired by their 
mother who is sadly no longer with us, as she lost her battle 
with cancer, but they were inspired to create a beautiful space in 
her honour. 
 
Thank you to the Prairie Sky Chamber of Commerce for putting 
on a great event, and congratulations to all the nominees and 
winners at this year’s Business Excellence Awards. 
 
The Speaker: — Just before we get into question period, the 
emergency broadcast system is going to go off at 1:55 p.m. So 
at that point I’m going to pause proceedings. We’ll let it 
continue on, and the clock will stop. We’ll go from there. 
That’s just to remind. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government Response to Shooting in La Loche 
 

Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Two years ago the then 
premier addressed the tragedy in La Loche and said that the 
government was “. . . investing in a range of programming that 
will foster hope and opportunity and enable more residents to 
lead independent, self-sufficient lives. Together, we are 
building a stronger La Loche.” 
 
Two years later, community leaders are speaking out to say that 
they’re still waiting. Mayor Robert St. Pierre said, “The 
community is still grieving and still waiting for the support we 
were promised years ago.” And in her statements yesterday 
Judge Janet McIvor called the situation in La Loche “. . . a 
travesty. It’s yet another victimization of all involved. It’s not 
fair. It’s not right.” She went to say “. . . what I heard was that 
counselling services aren’t available. I heard that people aren’t 
having counselling any more because they can’t afford 
counselling.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, these strong words should serve as a wake-up call. 
To the Premier: how is it that the promises of two years ago are 
ringing so hollow today? What happened to the range of 
supports that was promised two years ago? And what is the 
Premier doing today to ensure that the people of La Loche have 
what they need to finally begin to heal from this tragedy? 



May 9, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4253 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I remember that time in 
the days after that tragedy in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. I had the opportunity on a number of occasions to visit 
the community of La Loche with the then minister of 
Education, now Attorney General; now the Finance minister, 
Mr. Speaker, was then the minister of Social of Services. And I 
know others on both sides of the House did visit the community 
of La Loche to show their support for that community, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And we worked very closely with the community leadership at 
that point in time, Mr. Speaker. We consulted with them on the 
supports that would be required in the weeks and the months 
and the years ahead, the supports in the way of mental health, 
and the more lasting supports in the way of investing in 
education and investing in that community’s next generation, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we moved, at the request of the people in the community, 
Mr. Speaker, with $4 million invested into the school. We 
increased the counsellors in the school from two to five. Mr. 
Speaker, we increased the administrative supports in the schools 
themselves. We added additional funding in the community 
healing plan, as well as mental health and first aid training, 
investments in the La Loche Friendship Centre, Mr. Speaker. 
And there are other investments in education and in supports for 
that community, Mr. Speaker, but as always, more to do. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Provision of Transportation Services 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, this government is failing to meet 
the needs of the North, and we see that with growing troubles 
with mental health situations and with ongoing frustration in La 
Loche. They are not feeling that they’ve had their tragedy 
addressed. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not the only community that’s not 
getting their needs addressed. The loss of the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company a year ago has hurt many across the 
province, but people living with disabilities have been hit 
particularly hard. 
 
Joining us today are members of People First Saskatchewan, a 
disability rights group whose members have experienced 
first-hand the impacts of the loss of STC, and who have been 
speaking out on the issue. They tell us that with only limited 
and expensive options for travel, and that only between major 
centres, provincial meetings of that group have become all but 
impossible. These community leaders spoke of being prisoners 
in their own city. And they’ve said that “Our quality of life and 
our dignity have been taken away by this government.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, these community leaders are looking to the 
Premier for answers. Are people living with disabilities in our 
province to be prisoners in their own towns and cities, or is this 
government going to do something to remedy this theft of their 
quality of life, of their dignity? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, this government made a 
decision in the months gone by, Mr. Speaker, to wind down the 
operations of our provincial bus company, Mr. Speaker. It was a 
decision that was made on a financial basis, saving some 85 to 
$100 million over the next five years, Mr. Speaker. And 
notwithstanding the difficulty of making that decision, we 
continue to invest to ensure that those that need . . . those living 
with disabilities have the opportunity to travel, Mr. Speaker, to 
travel and ensure that they can get to the appointments that they 
have, and they can get, you know, around their community and 
around the province when need be to different meetings and to 
different things that are required, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We funded $32 million just this past year on the transit 
assistance for people living with disabilities, Mr. Speaker, to 
our communities, to some 78 communities across the province 
of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this is up 33 per cent over the 
course of the past year. But this is well-placed supports, Mr. 
Speaker, to ensure that those living with disabilities are able to 
be mobile within their community and within the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Changes to Rental Housing Supplement 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very difficult to hear those 
words — the Premier trying to tell us that they’ve dealt with the 
situation and helped people with disabilities get to where they 
need to get to — because that’s simply not the case. And the 
people here today are telling us exactly that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this cut, this closing down of STC is very similar 
to the rental housing supplement cut. It was done without any 
plan for replacement. And as a result, we’ve got people all over 
this province who are unable to meet their needs, unable to get 
where they need to go. Why does this government insist on 
cutting programs, on shutting down programs with no plan to 
replace them? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Social 
Services has said a number of times, we’re working with the 
federal government, Mr. Speaker, as they are moving into the 
housing space, Mr. Speaker. We are now faced also with a 
vacancy rate here in the province of about 7 to 9 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. When the rental housing supplement was brought in, 
Mr. Speaker, was to address the very tight vacancy rates that 
were in our communities here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important for all of us to remember that 
nobody is being cut off of this supplement. As we move 
forward, there is vacancy rates, Mr. Speaker, and there are 
opportunities for people to find places to live.  
 
And for our community’s most vulnerable, Mr. Speaker, we 
continue to provide the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
units that we have that are currently at a 13 per cent vacancy 
rate. So we would like for those in our communities that are 
requiring housing, Mr. Speaker, we will make those places 
available. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



4254 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2018 

Provision of Transportation Services 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly no surprise that the 
private sector hasn’t been able to step up and meet what STC 
was able to offer. You know, if the Premier were to tell the 
chamber of commerce that passenger and freight service for a 
province as large and sparsely populated as ours represented a 
lucrative business opportunity that would affordably fill the gap 
left by STC, why he’d be laughed out of the room. 
 
Private companies have not filled the gap, and the loss of this 
vital public service is hurting people and costing us all. A year 
ago, STC connected people and provided freight service to 200 
communities across the province. Today it’s only a handful, and 
only the largest centres. We’ve seen a crippling and costly loss 
of a connection between our communities with these cuts to 
freight and passenger service. It’s just one more example of the 
members opposite taking rural Saskatchewan for granted. 
 
Is the Premier going to allow this to continue? Is the 
government actually going to step in and subsidize the private 
sector to provide these services — fewer services, less 
accessible services — that STC used to proudly and so ably 
deliver? Or will the Premier finally admit that closing STC was 
a costly mistake and bring back publicly owned freight and 
passenger service to Saskatchewan? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the decision to wind down STC was a not an easy one, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s one that we did not take lightly. I know the 
members opposite argue that this was meant to be a public 
service and not to make money, but I note that nearly half the 
province, Mr. Speaker, weren’t even served by STC. And that’s 
partially due, Mr. Speaker, to the cuts to routes made by the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] party in the ’90s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, the new leader of the NDP has 
promised a new transportation system, and the member from 
Regina Rosemont has said this would only cost $10 million, 
Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that number . . . 
 
The Speaker: — To remind the minister to refer to the 
opposition as the opposition. I’d also remind the guests in the 
galleries to not participate in the debate on the floor. And with 
that, Minister, I’ll recognize the minister again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
remind the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, you know, that this 
cost $85 million over the next five years, Mr. Speaker. Our 
officials estimate it would cost $50 million to restart that, Mr. 
Speaker. So I’m not sure how they plan on doing this, Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
I think it’s probably to do with instituting a carbon tax, you 
know, a job-killing carbon tax that would kill the jobs for 
Saskatchewan people. And I should remind the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, that Grand Chief Ron Michel out of 
Prince Albert just opened a transportation system just last week. 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister says it 
wasn’t an easy decision. Well it wasn’t a smart decision, and 
they should have taken more time with it. Farmers are losing 
days in the field because they can’t get parts or they’re having 
to take loved ones to town for appointments. Local businesses 
are struggling . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Talk to farmers; 
I’m talking to lots of them. Local businesses struggle to ship 
their product to rural communities. Patients and medical 
supplies are travelling . . .  
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is remarkably 
unsightly to see the government across the way fail to recognize 
that farmers are losing days in the field. Farmers are not able to 
get parts the way they could. They’re losing days taking loved 
ones to appointments, and they’re telling us about it and they’re 
frustrated. 
 
And people for Saskatchewan, who I’m sure would appreciate 
an answer from the Premier on this one, is calling for a full 
accounting of just how much the closure of STC has cost the 
people of Saskatchewan. And we proudly add our voices to that 
call, Mr. Speaker, because again and again, again and again this 
government’s short-sighted approach is to cut the things our 
prosperity depends upon while spending wildly on pet projects 
that only enrich their friends. Eleven years of this approach has 
left us deeper in debt and lagging behind the rest of the country 
in growth and employment. 
 
The Speaker: — That was enough of the question. Thanks for 
not . . . Anyways, looking forward to a response. I recognize the 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a few minutes after 2. I’m 
a little concerned about our Canada-wide emergency alert that 
has not quite arrived yet. But, Mr. Speaker, we’re expecting it 
shortly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I listened with great interest to the Leader of the 
Opposition, Mr. Speaker, the opposition NDP, talking about 
supports for rural Saskatchewan and talking with farmers across 
this province and ensuring that they are out undertaking the 
great megaproject that we do every year in this province. Mr. 
Speaker, the same members across that support a Justin 
Trudeau carbon tax that would hurt that industry and hurt other 
industries in the province of Saskatchewan, and the same party 
that’s closed 52 hospitals, most of them in rural Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, the same party, the same opposition party, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. Recognize . . . Okay, we’ll 
pause to the end of the broadcast. 
 
I recognize the Premier. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. Sorry, you were up. 



May 9, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4255 

Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Those answers continue 
to ring more and more hollow in rural Saskatchewan, where 
people are increasingly frustrated with the lack of answers, 
including on STC, Mr. Speaker, and we really would like an 
answer on this. From unpaid severance payments to employees; 
higher costs in the justice system, which is now sending 
released inmates by taxi or by plane; and the increased costs in 
the health field; increased costs to local businesses who can’t 
ship their product. Mr. Speaker, the hasty decision to close 
down STC is costing us in ways that are becoming increasingly 
and increasingly clear. 
 
Will the Premier commit to a full audit, a full economic 
analysis of the costs of this government’s hasty decision to shut 
down STC? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, we are doing a full economic 
audit on what the cost of an NDP government in this province 
would be, Mr. Speaker, if they should ever be on this side, Mr. 
Speaker. Never mind a carbon tax that they support by Justin 
Trudeau, Mr. Speaker. Never mind their lack of support to rural 
Saskatchewan in closing down 52 hospitals across this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s members on this side of the House that support 900 more 
physicians in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
members on this side of the House that support building 15 
rural health care facilities, Mr. Speaker, in communities across 
the province — a children’s hospital, a hospital in Moose Jaw, a 
new Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. And it’s this 
government, Mr. Speaker, that has approved $4.4 billion in 
supports to those living with disabilities in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That’s a 161 per cent increase over the time 
when they were government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

People With Disabilities Working in Government 
 

Mr. Forbes: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the less the Premier 
has got to say, the less he’s got to say, the louder he gets, the 
louder he gets. 
 
Well I’ve got a question. Transportation is only one of the many 
challenges facing people with disabilities. Earlier this week, we 
raised concerns about the sharp decline in the number of people 
with disabilities working across government. Currently, only 
2.1 per cent of the government workforce identify as having a 
disability. This is a far cry from the target of 12.4 per cent. The 
government says they will consult public servants to determine 
whether anyone with a disability has been missed. The Premier 
has promised to do better. 
 
Would he agree that doing better doesn’t just include finding 
more people with disabilities in the public service, but actually 
developing concrete plans to hire more people too? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. And let me say at the outset that we as a government 

certainly value the good work that is done by people with 
disabilities living with a disability in the province. Our goal is 
to have a representative workforce, and we are working towards 
that. 
 
As the member indicated, and as I’ve had a chance to talk both 
inside and outside the House, currently the only opportunity 
employees have to self-declare as a person living with a 
disability is when they apply for a job. And in order to be more 
accurate in the people living with disabilities that are working 
within the government, the government is rolling out a new 
online self-declaration process this summer to allow employees 
to confidentially self-declare at any time that they have a 
disability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re doing all that we can. There is more to do. 
You know, we’re very proud of programs like Sarcan, for 
example, that are heralded across the country, where over 60 
per cent of the people working there have an intellectual 
disability. More work to do, Mr. Speaker, but indeed we are on 
the job. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the declining number of public 
servants with disabilities has caught the attention of disability 
advocates. Paralympian Miranda Biletski took to social media 
this week to highlight the challenges and stigma people with 
disabilities face in finding work, calling on the Premier to 
include the disability community in developing a strategy. 
 
There are lessons out there to increase representation. Alberta 
this week announced that they will be hiring their first disability 
advocate. And our own post-secondary institutions have seen 72 
per cent more students with disabilities for the same five years. 
What is this government’s strategy to recruit more people with 
disabilities to our public service? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. And as we do in many areas, we look at best practices 
across the country, examine what other provinces are doing, and 
if it makes sense to do it here, we indeed will do that. But at this 
current time, the Ministry of Social Services, for example, is 
undertaking a pilot project with Winston Knoll to ensure that 
people living with disabilities that are of high school age or are 
entering the workforce have every skill and every ability to gain 
those jobs. 
 
Also we can look at other examples, the CBOs 
[community-based organization] in the provinces. Social 
Services partners with groups that provide employment 
opportunities. I’ll give you a couple of examples: Handi-Works 
in Nipawin, Multiworks in Meadow Lake, the Clare Parker 
Home in Regina, and Southwest Homes in Swift Current, Mr. 
Speaker. And as a government, through the Ministry of 
Immigration and Career Training, they have allocated over $9.5 
million for the employability assistance program for people 
with disabilities, Mr. Speaker. And just to put that in 
perspective, that’s a 64 per cent increase over what members 
opposite did just a few short years ago. 
 



4256 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2018 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Global Transportation Hub and Provincial Job Numbers 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard a lot of fanfare from 
the other side about the GTH. We’ve seen ribbon cuttings and 
we’ve seen fancy, albeit inaccurate, maps and we’ve heard them 
boasting about the great economic project the GTH is supposed 
to be. It’s supposed to grow our trade, our transportation, and 
warehousing industry. But, Mr. Speaker, with the 
mismanagement we see from the Sask Party government, it’s 
never good news at the GTH. 
 
Since this time last year, our province has seen over a 7 per cent 
decrease in employees working in transportation and 
warehousing. So with a focused project like the GTH, how is 
the province not growing this industry? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve had some enormous 
success with the GTH. We’d like to see the Global 
Transportation Hub grow and prosper even further. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell the members opposite that during 
construction there were 1,800 jobs, $485 million in private 
investment. Now that it’s complete, over 860 full-time jobs. 
Every week 4,800 trucks move in and out. Of the 1,800 acres 
that comprise the Global Transportation Hub, over 700 acres 
are already sold or in operation by clients. There are currently 
12 clients there. There are opportunities for more clients to 
come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite went out there. They did a 
tour. They saw the variety of people that were working there 
and, Mr. Speaker, I hope that they value and respect that. And 
we’ll continue to look for and support growth in the Global 
Transportation Hub. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, there have been hundreds of 
millions of taxpayers’ dollars dumped into the GTH, and it’s 
not doing what the Sask Party government says that it is 
supposed to do. The number of employees working in 
transportation and warehousing is actually lower than it was 
five years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course Loblaw is a significant employer, but 
what’s concerning is the limited growth that’s happened at the 
rest of the GTH. Those empty lots of land they can’t sell 
employ no one. And their pipe dream for a world-class logistics 
hub creating thousands and thousands of jobs isn’t reflected in 
these job numbers. 
 
Now ten years ago the minister responsible for GTH at the time, 
Wayne Elhard, said the GTH could be “. . . of equal importance 
to the future of Saskatchewan’s transportation as the coming of 
the railway was in the 1880s.” Well, Mr. Speaker, it just hasn’t 
lived up to the hype. 
 

How is it that after all this time and taxpayers’ money, there are 
actually fewer people working in warehousing and 
transportation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that question 
touched on a number of topics, but what I will focus on is jobs, 
Mr. Speaker. What we saw last month was a jobs report 
showing 4,200 more people, more jobs in this province than the 
month before. Fifteen hundred more jobs year over year, Mr. 
Speaker, a rate of job creation that is one of the highest in 
Canada, largest percentage increase in the country in fact, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’ve seen GDP [gross domestic product] growth of over 20 
per cent since 2007, the third highest in the entire country. 
We’ve seen significant population growth in this province, 
historic population growth in this province over the course of 
the last decade, Mr. Speaker, over 165,000 newcomers to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Over the course of that same period of time when the members 
opposite were in government, Mr. Speaker, what did we see? 
Over 20,000 people leave Canada. We saw the worst rate of job 
creation in the entire country, Mr. Speaker. This is recognized 
by the voters of this province, and that’s why we’re never going 
back to the NDP. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Your ending statement’s out of order. I 
recognize the member for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
[14:15] 
 

SaskJobs Website 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, since the minister decided to wind 
down his SaskJobs website, job seekers and employers have 
grown increasingly frustrated. We’ve asked the Trade minister 
over and over again, where are the jobs, and still no answers. 
We heard examples today about how the wind-down of the STC 
has worked out for Saskatchewan people and, just like the 
minister of STC, the minister from Meadow Lake just doesn’t 
seem to get it. We know that when SaskJobs website was 
operating . . . [inaudible interjections] . . . the member from 
Meadow Lake . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Pick one. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Sure. And just like the minister of STC, the 
member from Meadow Lake just doesn’t seem to get it. We 
know that when the SaskJobs website was operating in 
February of this year, there were 7,325 jobs posted for the entire 
province. As of this morning, the minister’s Ottawa-based site 
has only 1,767 jobs posted.  
 
So to the minister: have we really lost 5,000 jobs in three 
months, or will he admit that it was a mistake to take down 
saskjobs.ca? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well the reality is we created 4,200 



May 9, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4257 

jobs month over month, Mr. Speaker. I have acknowledged that 
there are concerns, legitimate concerns with the 
user-friendliness of the national Job Bank. We’ve heard from 
employers in that regard, and for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I 
gave direction yesterday that saskjobs.ca be put back up. It’s 
back up as of right now. Clearly the members opposite . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I remind the people in the gallery to not be 
taking photographs of the Assembly. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To that end, I 
gave direction yesterday that saskjobs.ca be put back live, and it 
has been for some period of time now. Clearly members 
opposite didn’t check prior to coming into question period. But 
we will be maintaining that site for the next number of months. 
We’re going to be working with employers with regard to a 
transition to national Job Bank, and it’s something that we’ve 
heard from employers on, and from potential job seekers. We 
heard the message and we’re moving forward. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed 
by the Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill 
No. 94, The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education 
Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 94, The 
Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings 
(SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 without amendment and that 
the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 94 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for 
Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — I move that the bill now be read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 94 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I’m advised that His Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor is here for Royal Assent.  
 
All please rise. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 14:21 His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following bills.] 
 
His Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly at its present session has passed several bills which in 
the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour, to which 
bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — Your Honour, the bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 77 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Superannuation 

Plans) Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 78 - The Municipal Employees’ Pension Amendment 

Act, 2017 
Bill No. 79 - The Public Employees Pension Plan Amendment 

Act, 2017 
Bill No. 80 - The Municipal Financing Corporation 

Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 108 - The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 109 - The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2017 

(No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2017 modifiant le droit 
législatif 

Bill No. 74 - The Evidence Amendment Act, 2017/Loi 
modificative de 2017 sur la preuve 

Bill No. 96 - The Choice of Court Agreements (Hague 
Convention Implementation) Act/Loi sur les 
accords d’élection de for (mise en œuvre de la 
Convention de La Haye) 

Bill No. 101 - The Agricultural Implements Amendment Act, 
2017 

Bill No. 102 - The Agri-Food Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 72 - The Privacy Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 75 - The Electronic Communications Convention 

Implementation Act/Loi de mise en œuvre de la 
Convention sur les communications 
électroniques 

Bill No. 87 - The Data Matching Agreements Act 
Bill No. 95 - The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and 

Amendment Act, 2017 
Bill No. 97 - The Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) 

Amendment Act, 2017 



4258 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2018 

Bill No. 98 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute 
Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017/Loi 
modificative diverse (résolution des conflits 
familiaux) de 2017 

Bill No. 104 - The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 
2017/Code des droits de la personne de la 
Saskatchewan de 2017 

Bill No. 105 - The Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2017 

Bill No. 94 - The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for 
Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 
2017 

 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these bills. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the 
government to defray the expenses of the public service. 
 
In the name of the Assembly, I present to Your Honour: 
 
Bill No. 130 - The Appropriation Act, 2018 (No. 1) 
 
to which bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to the bill. 
 
[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:25.] 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 253 through 257. 
 
The Speaker: — Ordered 253 to 257. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 114 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 114 — The 
Vehicles for Hire Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter into adjourned debates on Bill No. 114, The Vehicles for 
Hire Act. This bill defines ride-sharing companies like Uber and 
Lyft as transportation network companies and distinguishes 
these companies from taxis as separate categories of companies 
with their own sets of rules. 
 

This bill proposes to allow municipalities to license and create 
bylaws for this industry, but ultimately it is up to our province 
to ensure safety of our communities, consumers, and workers. 
For decades we have developed regulations that affect taxi 
companies to protect the drivers and members of the public. 
Considering the dangerous attacks that have taken place in the 
past five years and the continued advocacy that members of the 
United Steelworkers 2014 and taxi area council continue to take 
on to fight for safety shields and insurance coverage for injured 
drivers, I think we can say there is still work to be done on these 
regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, certainly no one is saying no to bringing in 
ride-sharing companies, but regulations need to be put in place 
to ensure the safety of consumers and to protect all workers in 
the industry, and that is the role of the provincial government. 
What protections will be place for workers of these companies 
is yet to be seen. We’ve heard from transportation network 
companies, the Saskatchewan Taxi Cab Association, United 
Steelworkers 2014, and the taxi area council on these matters. I 
understand that the Saskatchewan Taxi Cab Association is 
concerned about the implication of creating a two-tier system, 
and I understand that union folks continue to be quite concerned 
with existing regulations in the taxi industry that impact worker 
safety and protection and the impact this legislation could have 
on their industry. 
 
We will have a number of questions in committee to ask for 
clarification from the minister on some of these points and to 
find out what input has been received from all stakeholders 
involved. But with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move that 
we adjourn debate on Bill 114, The Vehicles for Hire Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member of Saskatoon Fairview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 114, The Vehicles for Hire 
Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
House do now adjourn so committees may do their good work. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved to 
adjourn the House. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 10 a.m. 
tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:30.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4249 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4249 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4249 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4249 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4249 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4249 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4250 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4250 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Land Donation Provides Conservation Legacy 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4250 
 Early Childhood Educators Appreciation Day 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4251 
 Mental Health Week 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4251 
 Aquatic Invasive Species Awareness Week 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4251 
 Opening of Rosthern District Food Bank 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4251 
 Kindersley Brothers Excel in Hockey 
  Francis ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4252 
 Prairie Sky Chamber of Commerce Business Excellence Awards 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4252 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Government Response to Shooting in La Loche 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4252 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4253 
 Provision of Transportation Services 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4253 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4253 
 Changes to Rental Housing Supplement 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4253 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4253 
 Provision of Transportation Services 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4254 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4254 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4254 
 People With Disabilities Working in Government 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4255 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4255 
 Global Transportation Hub and Provincial Job Numbers 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4256 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4256 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4256 
 SaskJobs Website 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4256 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4256 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4257 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 94 — The Saskatchewan Advantage Grant for Education Savings (SAGES) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4257 
ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4257 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4258 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES — SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 114 — The Vehicles for Hire Act 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4258 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


	His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these bills.
	The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative Assembly has voted the supplies required to enable the government to defray the expenses of the public service.
	In the name of the Assembly, I present to Your Honour:
	to which bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent.
	His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to the bill.
	[His Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:25.]

