


















































April 25, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 48A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 25, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4029 
 April 25, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you and through all the members of the 
Legislative Assembly, 59 grade 7 and 8 students from École St. 
Angela Merici School in Regina Rochdale. Give us a wave. 
We’ve got 59 students that have come to observe the 
Legislative Assembly today, and they’re accompanied by their 
teachers, Meagan Lane and Vanessa Wiseman. 
 
I will be meeting with them later on in the Qu’Appelle gallery. 
We’ll have an opportunity for them to enter into probably a 
spirited dialogue. Maybe not quite as spirited as our question 
period, but I look forward to having an opportunity to visit with 
these fine students. 
 
So thank you very much, and please everyone welcome these 
fine students to their Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — That’s good. I represent the member for The 
Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, over the last several days and weeks 
and even throughout the winter, people have approached me 
when I’m at a sporting event or in a grocery store or the mall, 
and what they want to talk about is not our budget. Our budget 
has resonated well with the people of this province. They want 
to talk about Trudeau’s carbon tax and their opposition to that 
carbon tax. The only thing that’s on their mind is that carbon 
tax. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, today we announced we are asking the 
Saskatchewan Court of Appeal to answer the question on the 
constitutionality of this legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the vast majority of our citizens agree with the 
Minister of the Environment, Dustin Duncan, when he says, and 
I quote, “Our made-in-Saskatchewan climate change strategy is 
broader and bolder than a carbon tax.” With 2 million tonnes of 
CO2 captured at Boundary dam 3 and nearly 12 million tonnes 
of CO2 captured each year in our agriculture industry, he is right 
when he says Saskatchewan is the solution, not the problem, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of North 
Battleford and Battleford. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition to 
this Assembly to stop the Sask Party attack on our kids’ already 
strained classrooms. Those who’ve signed this petition wish to 
draw our attention to the following points: that the Sask Party 
cut $54 million from our kids’ classrooms in the devastating 
2017-18 budget; and that the 2018-19 budget only restores a 
fraction of last year’s devastating $54 million cuts to 
classrooms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like the member opposite, I certainly have a lot of 
people approaching me wanting to talk about the damage that 
those cuts have done to classrooms all across this province. 
Even though the Sask Party is making us all pay more, kids are 
actually getting less, and these cuts have meant that students 
lose much needed supports in their classrooms, including 
funding for buses for kindergartners and programs to help 
children with special needs.  
 
I’ll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon the 
government to fully restore the senseless cuts to our kids’ 
classrooms and stop making families, teachers, and 
everyone who works to support our education system pay 
for the Sask Party’s mismanagement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member of Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. And 
the undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan want 
to bring to our attention the following: that Saskatchewan’s 
outdated election Act allows corporations, unions, and 
individuals, even those outside the province, to make unlimited 
donations to our province’s political parties; and that the people 
of Saskatchewan deserve to live in a fair province where all 
voices are equal and money can’t influence politics. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, that over the past 10 years the 
Saskatchewan Party has received $12.61 million in corporate 
donations and, of that, $2.87 million have come from 
companies outside Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
politics should belong to Saskatchewan people. And we know 
that the federal government and the provinces of Alberta, 
Manitoba, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and now British Columbia 
have moved to limit this influence and level the playing field by 
banning corporate and union donations to the political parties. 



4030 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2018 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan campaign finance laws, to 
end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 
from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 
on individual donations. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical workplace supports for 
survivors of domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has 
the dubious distinction of having the highest rates of 
interpersonal violence amongst all of the provinces, and we all 
know we must do so much more to protect survivors of 
domestic violence. 
 
For many who experience domestic violence, the violence will 
follow them to their workplace. That’s why the signatories to 
this petition are calling for five days of paid leave and up to 17 
weeks of unpaid leave be made available to workers who are 
survivors of domestic violence, and that critical workplace 
supports made available to survivors of domestic violence 
should also be made available to workers living with PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder] as a result of domestic violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what we called for in our private member’s 
bill, Bill No. 609. This is the fourth time in two years we’ve put 
forward these provisions. The Sask Party has yet to pass them. 
It’s time for them to step up, do the right thing, and pass this 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to pass legislation to ensure 
critical supports in the workplace, including reasonable 
accommodation and paid and unpaid leave for survivors of 
domestic violence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this will catch us up to other jurisdictions in the 
country. It’s the least we can do as a province. The signatories 
to this petition come from Regina. I do so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Canadian Cancer Society Daffodil Month 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently staff and 
volunteers from the Saskatchewan branch of the Canadian 
Cancer Society brought daffodils to myself and to the Premier 
as a kickoff to April being Daffodil Month, the month to fight 
back against cancer. Mr. Speaker, cancer has touched the lives 
of too many of our loved ones in this province. Each of us has 

been impacted by this disease in some way. 
 
The outlook for those diagnosed with cancer has improved 
because of a number of factors, and one very important factor is 
the establishment of the Canadian Cancer Society which took 
place in 1935. Over time, support for cancer research through 
the Canadian Cancer Society has grown, and it now supports 
thousands of researchers through the administration of more 
than $1 billion in cancer research funding. 
 
The Cancer Society is a national community-based organization 
whose mission is the eradication of cancer and the enhancement 
of the quality of life of people affected by this disease. This 
organization has made an immense difference in the lives of 
many Canadians and their work supporting research will 
continue to impact Canadians’ lives into the future. Daffodil 
Month is a great time to remember just what we can accomplish 
when people work together to solve our most difficult 
challenges. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

Administrative Professionals Day 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to stand today in this Assembly to acknowledge 
Administrative Professionals Day. Whether they are called 
admins, administrators, office assistants, support staff, or 
anything else, these individuals truly are the heart and soul of 
each and every office. Today it’s important to take a moment to 
thank them for their essential and often overlooked work. It’s 
often said that the way they truly understand being an 
administrator can only be done when you are without. 
 
I would like to recognize Marcus Abrametz in my constituency 
office and Karalee Croissant, our long-serving admin in the 
government caucus office, for the work that they do to ensure 
that these offices run smoothly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of this Chamber work with 
administrative professionals every day, and I know I speak for 
all of us when we express our thanks for the hard work that they 
do. As elected representatives, we especially appreciate the 
work that is done with constituents on the front line. 
 
I ask that all members to join me in applauding the women and 
men in our lives and across the province that are administrative 
professionals. We appreciate their important contributions to 
keeping Saskatchewan strong. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Saskatoon Librarian Receives Movers & Shakers Award 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to recognize a special librarian and educator from 
Saskatoon. Jenny Ryan, a Saskatoon public librarian, has been 
named one of Library Journal’s 2018 Movers & Shakers for 
her extensive work of incorporating indigenous culture and 
perspectives into library programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Library Journal’s Movers & Shakers Awards 
were established to highlight individuals whose work is 



April 25, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4031 

transforming what it means to be a librarian. About 50 
individuals around the world are recognized with this award 
annually. Jenny, a winner in the educator category, was one of 
only two Canadians chosen for this honour from the prestigious 
international journal. 
 
She has been with the Saskatoon Public Library for 12 years 
and is currently the supervisor of the Mayfair Branch. She 
recently organized a major event to celebrate the creation of 
Equinox, a female, Cree DC Comics character. The event 
included performances by indigenous drummers, dancers, and a 
Skype Q & A [question and answer] with Equinox’s creator, 
Jeff Lemire.  
 
Jenny’s connections with the indigenous communities have also 
led her to organizing programs around indigenous storytelling, 
songwriting, and even stand-up comedy. Her work also aligns 
with the library’s strategic plan, which lists honouring 
indigenous perspectives as one of the four main organizational 
objectives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in recognizing 
Jenny on her well-deserved award. We all certainly appreciate 
the outstanding contributions of librarians right across 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Wynyard Teams Win Provincial Tournaments 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
confirming that the Kelvington-Wadena constituency is once 
again the home of champions, I am proud to share the results of 
the hard work and dedication exhibited by our youth in 
organized sports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first I would like to congratulate the Wynyard 
Bears senior girls’ basketball team for winning gold at Hoopla. 
This year’s tournament was hosted in Prince Albert on the 
weekend of March 23rd and 24th. This is the fourth straight 
year the Bears have won provincial gold. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, two minor hockey divisions hosted their 
provincial final games in front of a packed house in the 
Wynyard Memorial Arena on March 25th. In a hard-fought 
battle, the peewee Wynyard Monarchs conquered the Eastend 
Jets to become the peewee provincial D champions. And much 
to the chagrin of the member from Carrot River Valley, the 
bantam Wynyard Monarchs then took to the ice, defeating the 
Carrot River Loggers, earning the bantam provincial B 
championship. 
 
I’d like to thank the coaching staff of the hockey and basketball 
teams for their commitment to these athletes, as well as the 
supportive fans who travelled this province to cheer on their 
local all-stars. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 
congratulating the Wynyard Bears basketball team and the 
Wynyard Monarch peewee and bantam hockey teams on each 
earning provincial titles. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 

[13:45] 
 

Shaunavon Chef Inducted into Canadian Culinary 
Championships Hall of Fame 

 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like to 
congratulate Shaunavon’s Garrett Rusty Thienes on his 
induction into the Canadian Culinary Championships Hall of 
Fame. In 2016, Thienes won the Gold Medal Plates competition 
in Regina, which is an invitation-only event that attracts the 
province’s best-of-the-best in culinary arts. In 2017, he was 
brought back to the event as a judge. 
 
The 38-year-old has been cooking for 17 years with a love of 
food since he was a young man. After high school, Thienes 
worked various jobs, eventually finding himself in Calgary 
when a friend introduced him to the culinary industry. Mr. 
Speaker, after several years working alongside some inspiring 
Calgary chefs, Thienes decided to move back to his hometown 
of Shaunavon. 
 
In the summer of 2013, Thienes and his wife opened the 
Harvest Eatery, where the Saskatchewan-inspired menu has 
earned notoriety beyond the town’s limits. Thienes said that the 
opening of the restaurant in Shaunavon gave him the freedom to 
build a business that he wanted, allowing the taste of big-city 
eating in a small-town setting. Thienes credited his success to 
an amazing team including his wife and his other restaurant 
staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate Thienes on his success, 
and encourage anyone in the Shaunavon area to stop in and 
support the restaurant and his incredible support. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres.  
 

Gala Evening Raises Funds for  
Fanconi Anemia Foundation 

 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week I had the privilege of attending, along with my wife, the 
3rd Annual FAv [Fanconi anemia Vonn] Gala, right here in 
Regina. The event was held by the FAv Foundation, a charity 
who raises money for Fanconi anemia research and raises 
awareness about the OneMatch registry, Canada’s bone marrow 
and stem cell registry. FAv was formed to help young Vonn 
Chorneyko, an eight-year-old Regina boy who suffers from the 
disease. His mother, Ashley, helped create the group, and the 
first gala was held in 2016. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Fanconi anemia is an incredibly rare blood 
disease. Only about 30 people in Canada have it, and Vonn is 
the only one in Saskatchewan. FA [Fanconi anemia] is the 
result of a defect in proteins responsible for DNA 
[deoxyribonucleic acid] repair which leads to a bone marrow 
failure, leukemia, and other types of cancer. Vonn will 
eventually need a bone marrow transplant and that’s looking 
like it’s going to happen this summer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to its fundraising efforts, the FAv 
Foundation also organized a donor drive this February. Over 



4032 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2018 

3,100 people participated in this drive, a record for a OneMatch 
drive. It’s inspiring to see so many people willing to come out 
and help out young Vonn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this entire Assembly, I want to 
congratulate the FAv Foundation and Ashley, and the whole 
Chorneyko family, on this successful gala and donor drive. 
 
At the end of the evening, Mr. Speaker, they revealed how 
much money the gala raised, and it was an incredible evening. 
And MC [master of ceremonies] Craig Adam did a fantastic 
job. And the foundation raised over $124,000 that evening. So 
once again, congratulations to the FAv Foundation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 

Community Support for Industrial Millwright Course  
in Churchbridge 

 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would 
like to acknowledge the community support that allowed a new 
course to be offered at the Churchbridge Public School, a high 
school in my constituency in my hometown. Mr. Speaker, this 
is the first industrial millwright mechanics course offered in the 
province. The course services three communities — 
Churchbridge, Langenburg, and Esterhazy — providing 
students with opportunities to gain hands-on skills in each of 
the areas a journeyperson millwright is required to have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the school did face some challenges in acquiring 
the large amount of expensive industrial tools and equipment 
necessary to allow such a course to proceed. The Good Spirit 
School Division provides financial support, but it was difficult 
to source and pay for the machines required for the course. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in August 2017 one of the course instructors, 
Dwaine Bourgette, contacted Tyler Metz, owner of SaskPro 
Machine Works in Esterhazy, regarding the need for two lathes 
for the program. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Metz was a key supporter of 
the program, providing countless hours of research and 
eventually sourcing and securing two top-of-the-line lathe 
machines for the school and having them placed and operating 
in early April this year. 
 
The principal of the school, Amanda Kornaga, noted that the 
program would not be what it is today without the community 
support of SaskPro and Tyler Metz and other key businesses 
and sponsors of the program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate the Churchbridge Public 
School and surrounding communities as they continue their 
millwright mechanics education. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Challenge on Constitutionality of Federal Carbon Pricing  
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when we 
learned this morning that the ministers of Justice and the 
Environment were joining the Premier to make an 

announcement, I thought they were finally going to be coming 
clean on Bill Boyd’s irrigation scheme. But instead of clearing 
the air, they were seeking to change the channel. 
 
In that announcement, Mr. Speaker, we heard a lot. We heard a 
lot about what this Premier and this Justice minister believe to 
be the case when it comes to the Constitution and what it 
allows. On the matter of belief, Mr. Speaker, we have a few 
questions. 
 
Does the Premier believe that climate change is real, that it’s a 
pressing concern for Saskatchewan? And does he believe that 
it’s caused by human activity? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I believe this morning that the 
Leader of the Opposition and the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
had an opportunity to join the Government of Saskatchewan 
and stand with the people of the province of Saskatchewan in 
ensuring that we do not have what would be the largest single 
tax increase on the industries, Mr. Speaker, on the jobs, and on 
the families of this great province that we represent, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what I believe. 
 
I believe he passed up that opportunity, Mr. Speaker, and he 
doubled down on his support of a Trudeau carbon tax here in 
the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. He continued, he 
continued to stand with the Prime Minister, Justin Trudeau, in 
support of that carbon tax, Mr. Speaker. They chose — I 
believe they chose — to wave the white flag. And I believe they 
chose to submit to the fact that under an NDP government in 
Saskatchewan, the NDP Party is a wholly owned subsidiary, 
Mr. Speaker, a wholly owned subsidiary of the federal Liberal 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s a fair question, Mr. 
Speaker. For the people of Saskatchewan to have any faith that 
this government is serious about taking any action whatsoever 
on climate change, I do believe that they deserve an answer to 
those very straightforward questions, Mr. Speaker. Do you 
believe in climate change? Does the Premier believe in climate 
change? Does he believe we need to act on it in a serious way in 
Saskatchewan? And does he believe that human activity is at 
the cause of it, or does he think this is some sort of, I don’t 
know, witchcraft reasoning? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that 
human activity has an impact on our land, on our soil, and on 
our climate. And I believe we need to balance that impact with 
the positive economic opportunities that we have in the 
province of Saskatchewan, in the nation of Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. And I believe we need to promote the sustainable 
agriculture, the sustainable energy production that we have in 
this province, and sustainable extraction of our mining goods, 
Mr. Speaker, and our manufacturing too, our 150-plus countries 
that we export to all around the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I have a question for the Leader of the Opposition. Does he 



April 25, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4033 

believe that a federally imposed carbon tax that he supports, 
Mr. Speaker, would actually reduce emissions and enhance 
anything in this province of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, a great deal of bluster over there, 
but I am happy to hear that the Premier recognizes that climate 
change is a reality. It would be good to get beyond bluster a 
little bit more often and hear some practical answers. 
 
The Premier’s launching a desperate, eleventh-hour 
constitutional reference case without having taken any action to 
implement a made-in-Saskatchewan plan. If the Premier’s belief 
in the merit of this case should prove unfounded, Mr. Speaker, 
he’s leaving the entire province wide open to having a carbon 
price imposed on us, one designed by Trudeau rather than 
developing our own plan, Mr. Speaker. Brad Wall said . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Meadow Lake can come to 
order. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The former premier, the 
predecessor of the current Premier, said that “The people of 
Saskatchewan must be assured that any challenge based on the 
Constitution Act has a reasonable expectation of success.”  
 
What we saw today in today’s announcement was the Premier 
saying that he believes it does, but blind faith can only get us so 
far, Mr. Speaker. Every legal opinion sought by other provincial 
governments has told them a challenge would be unsuccessful. 
The overwhelming legal consensus is that a failure to act will 
result in exactly what this government says they don’t want: a 
plan being imposed on us by Trudeau, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan expect our government to act on 
evidence. What evidence does the Premier have that this 
challenge will be successful? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I will always take my legal 
advice from the Ministry of Justice and the Minister of Justice, 
Mr. Speaker, as opposed to the Leader of the Opposition, the 
good doctor from Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is this government that will always stand with 
the jobs, Mr. Speaker, and the families in this province of 
Saskatchewan. We will continue to ensure that this tax will not 
be, will not be, Mr. Speaker, imposed on the people across this 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What I see today, Mr. Speaker, what I saw again here this 
morning, and I believe, I believe what I saw was the Leader of 
the Opposition in an opposition party that is continually asking 
for a made-in-Saskatchewan carbon tax, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
asking to wave the white flag, Mr. Speaker, and let’s take the 
Trudeau carbon tax. He doubled down on that this morning, Mr. 
Speaker, and he continues, he continues to reinforce the fact 
that the NDP in this province is nothing more, Mr. Speaker, 
than a shill for the Trudeau government, Mr. Speaker. They’re a 

subsidiary, they’re a subsidiary of the federal Liberal 
government, Mr. Speaker, in their acceptance of this cost on the 
industries in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s the job of 
government to be thoughtful, to plan ahead, anticipate 
problems, and to address those problems efficiently and 
proactively. And climate change is just one such problem, Mr. 
Speaker, a problem that requires strong leadership to protect 
Saskatchewan jobs, protect our economy, protect agricultural 
producers, to protect families from life becoming less 
affordable as we seek to live up to our obligations today and to 
future generations. 
 
So my question for the Premier is, because I still have not heard 
any answer to this, Mr. Speaker: if the reference case that he 
announced this morning is unsuccessful, is this all we’ve got for 
protection? Where’s his plan B? If it’s unsuccessful, what is he 
going to do? Because right now all that I see is a plan to make 
sure that Trudeau’s plan is imposed upon us and no resistance 
whatsoever. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, it’s weak leadership, Mr. 
Speaker, and the constant thinking, a belief in failure from those 
members on that side of the House that has caused this province 
to not grow for some seven decades. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will always stand up for the sustainable nature 
in which our agricultural products are produced here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, that are produced essentially on a 
carbon-neutral standpoint, Mr. Speaker, and in addition to that, 
our grasslands, our forested lands, the sustainable energy 
production that we have here in this province, and our ability to 
get that production to ports around the world — never mind to 
customers here in the province, here in the nation of Canada — 
and offset some of those energy products that are coming from 
all around the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We will continue to stand for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan in enhancing the opportunities that we have to 
continue to export our sustainable products all around the 
world, Mr. Speaker. That’s the leadership the people of this 
province expect, Mr. Speaker, unlike the members opposite that 
are supporting the Trudeau carbon tax. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Emissions Reduction and Prairie Resilience Strategy  
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, no plan B, no plan B at all. Those 
Sask Party ministers love to talk up their prairie resilient plan, 
but a plan just isn’t a plan unless it has some targets. 
 
Let’s look at a few of the targets set out in the prairie resilience 
framework. What’s your target for natural systems? TBD, to be 
determined. The target for community preparedness, TBD. 
Physical infrastructure, TBD. Human well-being, TBD. And the 
list goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 



4034 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2018 

This is a government that’s unserious about climate change. 
And that unseriousness leaves the door wide open for Trudeau 
to impose his scheme on us. When will this government finally 
come to the table with a plan and a real target for addressing our 
greenhouse gas emissions? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we have engaged with a number of organizations 
around the province — businesses, industry associations, 
municipalities, universities — over the last two months. Over a 
hundred organizations have been consulted just in the last two 
months. 
 
What we will be doing late this spring, we’ll be finalizing the 
resilience measures that we will be using. By this summer, 
we’ll be finalizing the performance standards that we’ll be 
using for each of our heavy-emitting industries. And late 
summer, early fall, we will be finalizing the resilience targets 
and how we’re going to measure those for the people of 
Saskatchewan going forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that information will be provided. And at that 
time, I don’t think the member opposite will be able to hide 
behind this question that he’s answering, because he’ll have to 
make a decision. Does he stand with a made-in-Saskatchewan 
approach that doesn’t include a carbon tax, or is he standing 
with the federal government that believes they have the ability 
and the constitutional authority to impose a carbon tax, despite 
the fact that Saskatchewan will have a very broad and bold plan 
for the people of this province? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I love how the plan has now been 
downgraded to an approach. Mr. Speaker, they have no plan 
and what they’re doing on the climate change file is being cut. 
They cut 18 per cent from the climate change branch again this 
year, for a total cut of 80 per cent since 2012. They clear-cut the 
reforestation budget to zero. They scrapped tax credits and 
exemptions for green appliances or renovations to reduce your 
emissions. 
 
This government isn’t taking any steps forward when it comes 
to climate change, only steps backward. How can the minister 
claim to be taking climate change seriously when the only thing 
this government has to offer is more cuts and more emissions? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, first of all the member opposite, I think, probably 
should take a little bit of caution when he talks about more 
emissions because he was Environment minister in this 
province when emissions went up by 70 per cent over 16 years, 
Mr. Speaker, 70 per cent. And I’ll remind the member opposite, 
the David Suzuki Foundation, of all organizations, pointed out 
that the orange of the NDP should be turned brown for how bad 
their environmental record was, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to reforestation, frankly I’m 
embarrassed to have to inform the member of this because he is 
a former Environment minister. Beginning in 1939, there was a 
reforestation plan for the province that saw the provincial 
government pay for over 700 million trees being planted in the 
province. But beginning in the late 1980s, that obligation started 
to transfer from the provincial government, from the taxpayers, 
to the industry, Mr. Speaker, meaning that last year was the last 
year the provincial government had any obligation in 
reforestation, Mr. Speaker. He should know this. This is 
embarrassing. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Evaluation of Carbon Capture and Storage 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, on November 3rd, 2017, the 
president of SaskPower told the media that it’s “highly unlikely 
that SaskPower would recommend further carbon capture and 
storage projects because of the price tag.” Then he told me and 
the minister during committee last December, a month later, 
that a recommendation to the SaskPower board on the future of 
CCS [carbon capture and storage] in Saskatchewan would be 
coming by the end of that month. Now that was four months 
ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The SaskPower president and Crown corporation experts on 
this project have made their feelings about this project clear, but 
we can’t get a straight answer from the minister. Has 
SaskPower sent that recommendation to the minister, and when 
can we finally expect a decision about the future of CCS? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, what I would point out is that we have been working 
towards an equivalency agreement. That does change the time 
frame when it comes to Boundary dam 4 and 5. That’s why it’s 
very critical for us to be able to achieve that equivalency 
agreement, Mr. Speaker. And that has taken a couple of months 
longer than we thought that we would be at, at this point in 
time. So that has pushed those timelines back, but that certainly 
is very important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously a recommendation, when it does come 
forward, will have to go through the CIC [Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan] board, as well as ultimately 
cabinet to make that decision. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, also keep in mind that this is not the future 
of CCS. This is the future of Boundary dam 4 and 5 because 
CCS will continue to be used on Boundary dam 3 until 2044, 
unless the members opposite . . . It’s their position that we 
should shut down CCS in this province, Mr. Speaker. And 
obviously we’ll have decisions on other power units going 
forward beyond 4 and 5, Mr. Speaker. So the decision on CCS 
isn’t related alone to 4 and 5, but we do have to make decisions 
on 4 and 5 first, coming up. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 



April 25, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4035 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about Boundary 
dam 4 and 5. Saskatchewan people just are not confident in the 
Sask Party’s stories about CCS. It was the Sask Party and Brad 
Wall and Bill Boyd who spun glowing stories about the 
performance of the plant, and it wasn’t until we were given 
briefing documents in our office that we were able to let the 
public know what was really going on at Boundary dam 3. Last 
week when I questioned the minister, he said: 
 

We . . . appreciate the deliberations that the SaskPower 
board makes on a number of issues, but at the end of the 
day the Government of Saskatchewan is the shareholder of 
SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. So ultimately the government 
does have a decision that we need to make . . . 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these cabinet ministers are the ones who are 
making this decision. So if they say yes to CCS, how many 
more rate hikes will there be? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I think the member opposite is aware of the fact that, 
according to the UN [United Nations] IPCC [Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change], a 2-degree reduction in world global 
temperatures isn’t possible with carbon capture and 
sequestration technology, especially at a time where the world 
is developing over 1,500 or 1,600 coal-fired power plants, 
either under construction or in development around the world, 
Mr. Speaker. So this is very important technology, not just for 
Saskatchewan but in fact for the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are certainly going through a process of 
making that deliberation, that evaluation, on the next units, Mr. 
Speaker, knowing that there will be future units that we’ll have 
to make that decision on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also note as well that the Boundary dam 
unit, Boundary dam 3, the carbon capture and sequestration has 
been working just like the NDP surrender flags on the carbon 
tax: at 100 per cent in 2018, and we look forward to continued 
success in this unit going forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Availability of Government Official 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we saw another senior 
official do something that is perfectly normal, or at least 
perfectly normal for anyone who isn’t Laurie Pushor, the senior 
official at the centre of the GTH [Global Transportation Hub] 
land deal. 
 
Yesterday a senior official in Education came into the rotunda 
and took questions from the media. The journalists didn’t bite 
him. He answered their questions as best as he could, and he 
made it out of there in one piece. 
 
Now there’s nothing for Mr. Pushor to be afraid of, and we’re 
not asking for anything out of the ordinary. We just want to 
know, finally, what went down at the GTH. So when will the 
Sask Party let Laurie Pushor out of the deputy ministerial 

witness protection program? When will they free Laurie? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we 
canvassed this issue yesterday with respect to Mr. Pushor. He is 
deputy minister of the Ministry of Energy and Resources. He’ll 
be attending estimates with the Minister of Energy and 
Resources, and at that point will be there to support the minister 
in responding to questions at estimates, Mr. Speaker, as that 
member should very well know. That’s how estimates work. 
 
But what we heard earlier in question period today, Mr. 
Speaker, with regard . . . I heard some talk of plan B. Well you 
know what plan A for the NDP is, Mr. Speaker, on the carbon 
tax? Plan A is to surrender to Justin Trudeau, Mr. Speaker. Plan 
A for the Leader of the Opposition is to wave the white flag, to 
knuckle under, to do whatever Justin Trudeau tells him, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That is in stark contrast to this side of the House, the strong 
leadership shown by our Premier. The strong leadership shown 
by this government; the weak leadership shown by that member 
opposite, Mr. Speaker. We are going to continue to fight for this 
province. We are going to fight this carbon tax, Mr. Speaker, all 
the way. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Mental Health Services for Children 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Children’s 
Advocate told reporters that the current wait-lists for children to 
receive mental health care are shameful. He again raised 
concerns about the two-year wait-list to see a child psychiatrist, 
an unacceptable reality and one that hits our northern children 
the hardest. 
 
The advocate has said that barriers to accessing mental health 
services simply because of where they live amounts to a 
violation of their rights under the UN Convention on the Rights 
of the Child. He also said that counsellors dropping in and then 
leaving communities simply isn’t the solution, that they need 
supports developed within these communities that stay within 
these communities.  
 
What specific actions is this government taking to level the 
playing field for northern children to ensure that they have the 
same access to the help and hope they so desperately need? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve 
stated in the House before — and I’ll state every time I stand 
when it comes to our northern citizens, and particularly our 
children in the North and some of the struggles that they have 
— it does touch one’s heart when you hear some of the 
struggles and some of the issues that they have gone through 
and continue to go through, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s why as a government we focused very strongly on 
supports in the North. If we look at our health care budgets, 



4036 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2018 

which support the Saskatchewan Health Authority particularly 
in the North, our northern health regions have enjoyed increases 
to their health budgets that outpace the southern part of the 
province: 83 per cent in the former Mamawetan regional health 
authority; and Keewatin Yatthé, almost 60 per cent, which 
outpaces our southern regions, former regions. 
 
So we are investing in those areas, Mr. Speaker. That’s helped 
to fund things like suicide prevention protocols that have been 
implemented in northern mental health and addiction services. 
That includes 93 staff that have been trained in mental health 
first aid, which is very effective, 228 in applied suicide 
intervention skills, and many others. And I’d be happy to 
answer more detailed questions if more come. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, as tragic as it is, we know 
the problem isn’t isolated to northern Saskatchewan. The 
advocate spoke of challenges facing kids in our major cities. He 
says that children suffering in mental health crisis and that are 
going to the ER [emergency room] are “. . . waiting 10, 12, 14, 
16 hours . . . and our system sends them away and they end up 
in one of our reports.” Tragically, kids are giving up all hope 
and we’re losing lives. 
 
Saskatchewan has a serious shortage of psychiatrists. We fall 
well below the rest of the country. The advocate called on the 
government to prioritize the recruitment of child psychiatrists 
because we need to do so much better for these kids. When will 
we see the full complement of child psychiatrists within our 
province? And when will we see action on the damaging and 
unacceptable wait-lists in our ERs? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
the point of the member opposite, those lengths of wait-lists 
aren’t province wide. They’re much shorter in Regina. They’re 
much shorter in Prince Albert. But there is an unacceptable 
length of wait time in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. We’re extremely 
concerned about this.  
 
Recently, Mr. Speaker, the deputy minister of Health sent a 
letter to the chief executive officer of the Saskatchewan Health 
Authority, Mr. Speaker. I’ll read parts of that letter. It talks 
about an 18- to 24-month wait time for child and youth 
psychiatry in Saskatoon as unacceptable, and they deserve a 
more timely service. It goes on, Mr. Speaker, to talk about 
strategies that have been successful in Regina and Saskatoon. 
And the fact, Mr. Speaker, that we’re in a situation now that we 
move to one single health authority, it’s reasons like this that I 
think are extremely important. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve asked the Saskatchewan Health 
Authority to look at the strategies — Regina, Prince Albert — 
implement them in Saskatoon, and to get those wait-lists down 
to a more acceptable level. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we hear new talk from the 
government about mental health supports in schools. This is 

something that we wholeheartedly support and that we’d press 
the government for an investment and action on. But the fact is 
their talk doesn’t match their walk. In fact they’re going in the 
exact opposite direction. Last year’s budget eliminated mental 
health services and supports throughout Prince Albert schools. 
 
When will the Sask Party’s government talk match its walk? 
When will they step up and save lives? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as you’ll know, there’s additional resources in the 
budget this year, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Health and I 
have been having an ongoing conversation with respect to a 
program which we’ve seen work very, very well in the province 
of Alberta, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to continue to have that 
discussion in terms of rolling out some of that programming in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The health, mental health, the physical health of the children 
that are in our school systems and across the province is a high 
priority for this government, Mr. Speaker. We’ll continue to 
look to see how we can enhance resources, not just in our 
classrooms, Mr. Speaker, but across the entire province to make 
sure that we’re taking care of the most vulnerable people in our 
community, and that’s our children. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we wholeheartedly support 
an investment and action and for mental health services 
throughout our schools. But how can the Deputy Premier, the 
Minister for Education, stand in his place and suggest that 
there’s going to be some sort of action on this front when we 
know that the reality of last year’s budget eliminated mental 
health services and counselling throughout Prince Albert 
schools? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, we understand that for 
children to learn properly, Mr. Speaker, that they have the 
proper resources. And that’s why in this year’s budget, Mr. 
Speaker, there are resources to enhance the delivery of services 
within our schools.  
 
And as I’d mentioned before, the Minister of Health and I and 
the Minister of Rural and Remote Health have had this 
discussion, Mr. Speaker, to see how we can implement the 
program, which we’ve seen work very successfully in Alberta, 
work within our school system, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to 
continue to have that discussion, Mr. Speaker, and help to roll 
out that program across our schools to provide the appropriate 
support that our children need. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we don’t need ongoing 
conversation. We don’t need this across the floor. What we 
need is an investment in our kids. 
 
Will the Minister of Education, the Deputy Premier, reinstate 



April 25, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4037 

the dollars to the Prince Albert region to ensure that those 
services, mental health services and counselling, can be 
reinstated for children, students all through Prince Albert and 
area? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve stood up twice now and 
told the member opposite what our plans are with respect to the 
funds that are going to be available in this year’s budget, Mr. 
Speaker, but let me give you some detail.  
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s over $30 million in funding that provides 
over 400 counsellors, psychologists, and social workers in our 
education system — 236 counsellors, 70 psychologists, and 78 
social workers, Mr. Speaker. We support other programs, Mr. 
Speaker, like the Kids Help Phone, anti-bullying resources and 
grants, Mr. Speaker, and mental health first aid training. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we continue to do what we can do with respect 
to supporting our children in our classrooms. The additional 
programming that we’re going to be moving forward with, Mr. 
Speaker, as a result of the funding in this year’s budget, Mr. 
Speaker, is going to go directly to help those children in our 
school system that need that assistance. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 

Government of Saskatchewan Challenge to  
Federal Government Carbon Tax 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured 
to rise today to inform the House that the Ministry of Justice 
has launched its reference case to challenge the Trudeau carbon 
tax. Mr. Speaker, we are asking the Saskatchewan Court of 
Appeal a simple and clear question on the constitutionality of 
the federal government’s legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question we are asking is The Greenhouse Gas 
Pollution Pricing Act was introduced into parliament on March 
28th, 2018 as part 5 of Bill C-74. If enacted, will this Act be 
unconstitutional in whole or in part? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government’s Act consists of two main 
parts. The first part imposes a charge on the use of fuels such as 
gasoline, diesel, and natural gas that are burned in listed 
provinces. The second part provides emission limits for 
businesses within certain industries in listed provinces. Mr. 
Speaker, the federal government determines which provinces 
are listed provinces. 
 
The Act indicates the federal cabinet should ensure that 
greenhouse gas emissions across Canada are priced at levels 
that it, the federal government, considers appropriate. They will 
take into account if provinces have created their own carbon 
taxes. So this means that these changes and emissions will 
apply in some provinces and not others, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan objects to the constitutionality of this tax, Mr. 

Speaker, primarily on the ground that the tax will be applied 
only in certain provinces. And, Mr. Speaker, because the 
application of the tax in those provinces depends on whether the 
province has chosen to create its own carbon tax at a level that 
satisfies the federal government, Mr. Speaker, it is the Ministry 
of Justice’s position that the selective application of a federal 
tax in only certain provinces is not authorized by our 
constitution. This does not respect the principles of federalism, 
Mr. Speaker — principles that are the bedrock of our 
constitution. As well, Mr. Speaker, the carbon tax does not 
respect the province’s right to make decisions about matters 
within its jurisdiction. 
 
It is our position that part II of the Act, which imposes emission 
limits on businesses within certain industries, encroaches on 
provincial jurisdiction. The regulation of specific businesses 
within a province has traditionally been seen as a matter of 
falling under provincial jurisdiction over “local works and 
undertakings,” “property and civil rights,” and local matters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition the emission limits created by part II of 
the Act encroach on provincial jurisdiction over resources. The 
provinces own most of the natural resources within their 
boundaries, Mr. Speaker, and have jurisdiction over these 
resources by virtue of sections 92(5) and 92(A) of the 
Constitution Act, 1867. 
 
Section 92(A) in particular provides that the provinces have 
exclusive legislative jurisdiction to make laws in relation to 
development, conservation, and management of non-renewable 
natural resources in the province, including laws in relation to 
the rate of primary production therefrom, Mr. Speaker. 
Emission limits directly interfere with this power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will be a period of time before the Court of 
Appeal hears our case and we anticipate that additional 
provinces and, potentially, industry leaders may intervene to 
bolster our case against the Trudeau carbon tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s more that I would like to say on this 
matter, but as the case is now before the Saskatchewan Court of 
Appeal, it would be inappropriate to discuss our legal 
arguments further. But I will add that the Government of 
Saskatchewan is not a subsidiary of the federal government. We 
will not apologize for standing up for Saskatchewan rights now 
and we will continue to stand up for Saskatchewan’s rights in 
the future. Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And as is custom, 
I’d like to thank to minister opposite for giving us his remarks 
ahead of time. This is certainly an interesting case that many 
throughout the province and the country will be paying close 
attention to. We heard from the previous premier, Brad Wall, 
about the importance of assuring the people of Saskatchewan 
that any challenge based on the Constitution Act needs to have a 
reasonable expectation of success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have stated for a long time that we need a 
made-in-Saskatchewan plan to protect us from Trudeau’s 
carbon pricing scheme — a made-in-Saskatchewan plan that 



4038 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2018 

takes into account our emission-intensive and trade-exposed 
industries such as jobs in steel, jobs in our mines, jobs in 
agriculture, and jobs in oil and gas. We need a plan that protects 
our producers and people living in remote northern 
communities. But to this day we have seen little action from the 
Sask Party government. Now Saskatchewan is at risk of a 
Trudeau-imposed plan. 
 
As the Justice critic I’m looking forward to finally seeing the 
legal arguments that this government will be bringing forward. 
For years as the opposition we have been asking in the House, 
through freedom of information, and in the rotunda for the 
government’s arguments on this case, but they’ve refused to 
provide them time and time again. Saskatchewan needs 
leadership on climate change. For more than a decade this 
government has failed to deliver. We need a 
made-in-Saskatchewan plan, a real plan with targets that takes 
into account the real needs of Saskatchewan’s unique economy. 
Thank you. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Standing Committee 
on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs  
and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 95, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment 
Act, 2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — Minister of Justice and Attorney General has 
requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 95, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and 
Amendment Act, 2017 and that the bill be now read the third 
time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Minister may proceed to move third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 95 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal  
and Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 95, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is third 
reading for Bill No. 95, The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and 
Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs  
and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 97, The Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) 
Amendment Act, 2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration of 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and the bill be now read 
the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — Minister of Justice and Attorney General has 
requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 97, The Arbitration (Family Dispute 
Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 and that the bill be now read 
the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Minister may proceed to move third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 97 — The Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) 
Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move the bill be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 97, The Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is third 
reading for Bill No. 97, The Arbitration (Family Dispute 
Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 



April 25, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4039 

Assembly to adopt the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs  
and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 98, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute 
Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017, a bilingual bill without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in the 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and the bill be now read 
the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 98, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Family 
Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 and that the bill be 
now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The minister may 
proceed to move third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 98 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute 
Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017/Loi modificative diverse 

(résolution des conflits familiaux) de 2017  
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we move to move third 
reading. I understand the member opposite wishes to make 
comments. 
 
The Speaker: — Now? Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
I recognize the member for Regina Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank you for the 
opportunity to add a few more remarks to this bill. We’re 
largely supportive of this bill and the move of the Ministry of 
Justice to allow for more options for alternative dispute 
resolution in family law proceedings. We’re supportive of that. 
We’re supportive of doing what we can to ensure there are less 
delays in the court system. But there are some concerns that we 

have that I want to make sure are on the record because there 
are some changes in this bill that may do the opposite of the 
intended goals as stated. 
 
The bill will now require a mandatory family dispute resolution 
process for anyone who is going through a family law 
proceeding, with some exceptions that are made in the bill, 
which is a very major change to the family law court process. 
There are some concerns that this will result in some extra costs 
for many and it may slow down a process, when the actual 
intent was to make it more efficient. This is adding, potentially, 
an extra cost in a system that’s already expensive. 
 
And when we talked about this last night at committee, the 
minister suggested that the Family Matters program could be an 
alternative to some of the more expensive options like 
arbitration, Mr. Speaker. But what we are hearing is that Family 
Matters is also suffering from some delays in terms of 
individuals who are contacting their services and then being 
able to access those services as intended. And when we have 
individuals who are trying to seek remedies that deal with 
children, for example, it’s important that they get to be able to 
obtain those remedies as soon as possible. 
 
So we urge the ministry that if Family Matters is being 
considered as the alternative, the low-cost alternative, that that 
Family Matters program funding and the Family Matters 
mandate be more directed toward those who are of limited 
income, those who are of limited means, Mr. Speaker, because 
of the long waits that we’re hearing of right now. 
 
Further, there’s also some concerns about the extra work, that 
this will be placed on legal aid lawyers, Mr. Speaker, because 
legal aid covers some family law proceedings. But we’ve seen 
from this government little additional funding. In fact it’s been 
several years that we’ve seen new legal full-time equivalents 
and legal assistant full-time equivalents in Legal Aid. So we 
want to raise that also as a concern to make sure that legal aid is 
being properly . . . [inaudible]. 
 
We also suggest an amendment to section 44.01, that in the 
section (6) amendment that they allow for an exemption for 
petitioners whose opposing party has been noted for default, to 
ensure that those folks do not have an extra step that they need 
to go through after they’ve been able to successfully serve the 
respondent, and the respondent has not responded to the 
petition. That petitioner should therefore then be able to obtain 
a default judgement without having to go through this 
additional alternative dispute resolution process. 
 
Further, in subsection (c) there’s an exemption for those who 
experience interpersonal violence, that they don’t have to go 
through this process. We welcome that. We just want to ensure 
that the ministry monitors that to ensure that the requirement to 
be able to get that exemption is not too onerous on the 
applicant, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So largely we wanted to put a few more concerns on the record, 
and we do hope that the ministry — understanding that this is 
going to be a slow roll-out process — continues to monitor this 
change, because it is a major change, and continue to solicit 
feedback with practitioners and those involved in this process. 
Thank you. 



4040 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2018 

[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is third 
reading for Bill No. 98, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Family 
Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs  
and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
to report Bill No. 104, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 
2017, a bilingual bill, without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration of 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and the bill be now read 
the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 104, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 
2017 and that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 104 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 
2017/Code des droits de la personne de la Saskatchewan  

de 2017 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move the bill be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 104, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017 be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is third 

reading for Bill No. 104, The Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Code, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING  
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs  
and Justice 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
to report Bill No. 105, The Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and the bill be now read 
the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 105, The Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 and that the bill be now 
read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 105 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the minister that Bill No. 
105, The Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is third 
reading for Bill No. 105, The Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2017. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 



April 25, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4041 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Withdrawal of Privilege Case 
 
The Speaker: — Never a dull moment. Yesterday the 
Opposition House Leader raised the question of privilege 
concerning the release of details related to Bill No. 126, The 
Energy Export Act, before its introduction in the Assembly. At 
the beginning of routine proceedings, the Minister of Energy 
and Resources apologized and provided an explanation to the 
Assembly about how a news release on the bill was released to 
the media in error. She assured the Assembly that steps will be 
taken to ensure such an error will not happen again. 
 
Subsequently, the Opposition House Leader wrote the Speaker 
to indicate she would not put forward her question of privilege 
as a consequence of the minister’s apology. This obviates the 
need for the Speaker’s ruling for the reason of the minister’s 
apology and the formal withdrawal of the case. I consider the 
matter closed. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 231 and 232. 
 
The Speaker: — Ordered 231, 232. I recognize the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to question 233. 
 
The Speaker: — Tabled 233. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 234 and 235. 
 
The Speaker: — Ordered 234, 235. I recognize the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 236 to 239. 
 
The Speaker: — Tabled 236 to 239. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 123 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 123 — The 
Snowmobile (Fees) Amendment Act, 2018 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise today to speak to Bill No. 123, An Act to amend 
The Snowmobile Act. This is a very straightforward piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, basically at the request of the 
Snowmobile Association. They’ve asked for some changes to 
how fees are handled in certain instances, Mr. Speaker, and the 
government is accommodating that request. 
 
Currently the fees are funnelled through the GRF [General 
Revenue Fund] and then moved back out through to the 
Snowmobile Association administrator. And of course, Mr. 
Speaker, you’ve always got to be worried when money flows 
through the GRF because sometimes the government might 
want to keep some of it for themselves. But in this case they’re 
not doing that at all. They’re agreeing with the Snowmobile 
Association. 
 
Basically SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] is 
collecting all these fees on behalf of the province and then they 
funnel that money to the GRF. Then they find out how much of 
that money belongs to snowmobiles, advise the Ministry of 
Parks, and then they provide that amount to the associations 
because it is designated. Those funds are designated for trail 
maintenance. 
 
So this makes actually quite a lot of sense, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re just changing subsection 41(1)(t) to allow the 
regulations to be passed prescribing the manner in which the 
administrator may use the fees. And then section 42, which is 
the fee section, is being repealed and substituted so that the 
administrator will pay over to the General Revenue Fund the 
fees for driver’s licences and registration permits, but they may 
retain from those fees mentioned in subsection (1) any monies 
designated by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 
 
So it still needs to go through regulation and we’ll see what the 
regulations say when they come out. Of course we don’t get to 
see those until after they’re passed. But at any rate the 
administrator will be able to keep something rather than going 
through this tortuous path that it currently goes through. 
 
I think we have no reason to be concerned about this bill at this 
point in time. Certainly we’ll want to be able to ask some 
questions in committee when that opportunity arises. So at this 
point, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this needs to be moved 
forward into the committee process. And that’s the extent of my 
comments on Bill No. 123, An Act to amend The Snowmobile 
Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the minister that Bill No. 123, The Snowmobile 
(Fees) Amendment Act, 2018 be now read a second time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 



4042 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2018 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 123, The 
Snowmobile (Fees) Amendment Act, 2018 be committed to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — The bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 91 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 91 — The 
Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to enter into 
debate on Bill No. 91, The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017. 
This bill proposes to update what is now I think a 20-year-old 
piece of legislation, or last updated about 20 years ago. 
 
It would seem that the main reason that we see this bill in front 
of us is a change in responsibilities, a shift of responsibilities 
from the Highway Traffic Board to SGI, and this bill largely 
updates that transfer and assigns a lot of the responsibilities 
currently assigned to the Highway Traffic Board to SGI. So that 
makes up the bulk of the bill. 
 
But there are some other changes and updates in this bill as 
well. One is around updating of the definition of “snowmobile” 
to conform with current standards. Like everything else, Mr. 
Speaker, snowmobiles have changed over the last 20 years and I 
understand that that clause is to update that reality. 
 
There are some changes around . . . or some restrictions placed, 
if this bill passes, for the use of snowmobile trails between 
December 1st and April 15th. I guess that seems a reasonable 
time to have winter in this province. It doesn’t always conform 
to those dates, but I’m sure that there is a reason that those dates 
were chosen. 
 
And one of the other pieces that I’m sure that we’ll have more 
questions of the minister and his officials in committee is 
around the removal of the authority of trail managers to set 
permit fees. The change is now that snowmobile trails will be 
funded through registration fees. And I’m not sure if that 
currently is the practice and we’re just updating that, Mr. 
Speaker, how much is raised through registration fees and how 
those are applied to the trails. But those are some of the 
questions we will have the opportunity to ask in committee. 
 
So without further ado, Mr. Speaker, I move to move Bill 91 to 
committee. 

The Speaker: — Question before the Assembly is the motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 91, The Snowmobile Amendment 
Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 91, The 
Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017, be committed to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — The bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 110 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 110 — The 
Animal Protection Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again to enter into debate on Bill No. 110, The Animal 
Protection Act, 2017. This again is a bill that replaces The 
Animal Protection Act of 1999, again almost 20 years ago. This 
is of course a very important piece of legislation when we’re 
talking about the protection of animals, very vulnerable and 
dependent on us, Mr. Speaker. And as government, there’s a 
responsibility to ensure that we are providing the necessary 
protection for animals in this province. 
 
I know that there are a lot of people who are very happy to see 
this bill come forward. There’s been a . . . Again this has been 
almost 20 years since this bill was last updated, and during that 
time Saskatchewan fell in terms of protection, the standards 
across the country. The 2016 Canadian Animal Protection Laws 
Rankings put Saskatchewan in 11th place, the last place of all of 
the provinces and one territory ahead of us. So there was some 
definite need for updating this Act. 
 
I understand that there’s been some consultation with those in 
the sector, specifically the Sask Veterinary Medical 
Association. And there are some comments on record with 
regard to that consultation, both by the minister and members 
on this side. 
 
I think that there are a number of questions that I do have about 
this, but I think that I will ask those questions in committee. 
And with that, I will conclude my remarks. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 110, the animal protection 
amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 



April 25, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4043 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? 
 
[14:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 110, the animal 
protection amendment Act, 2017 be committed to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 126 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Eyre that Bill No. 126 — The Energy 
Export Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise today and join in the debate for Bill No. 126, An Act 
respecting Energy Exports. Mr. Speaker, our party’s position on 
this has been clear for many years. This is a federal project that 
is in Saskatchewan’s interest and it very much needs to go 
forward. We support a triple bottom line process that ensures 
social, economic, and environmental benefit. Unfortunately the 
Trudeau Liberals have not shown leadership on this file and 
they really need to do so, so that this project can get built. We 
also support the 1,100 workers at Evraz who will be supplying 
75 per cent of the pipeline for this project, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have a problem with the Sask Party’s 
failure to address climate change or have any real credibility on 
the environment, and that makes it harder for these projects to 
get built. In fact this government has failed to lay an inch of 
pipeline to tidewater over the last 10 years, and they’ve cut 
funding for the climate change branch and green energy. This is 
a government, Mr. Speaker, that has no plan to deal with 
pollution in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our number one concern is for jobs for 
Saskatchewan people. We’re also concerned, not only about the 
jobs at Evraz but also the jobs at Lloydminster Upgrader, the 
Co-op Refinery, and in the trucking sector. We’re fighting for 
all Saskatchewan jobs. We can’t trust the Sask Party and we’ll 
never write them a blank cheque. What we need to see, Mr. 
Speaker, is federal leadership from the Trudeau government so 
that we can see progress on this project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we should never have gotten to this point to begin 
with. If Trudeau and the Liberals would have stepped up to the 
plate and done their job, we would not be in this situation at all, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

I know I have a lot of my colleagues who wish to enter into this 
debate so at this point I’m ready to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
126. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Douglas Park has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 126, The Energy Export 
Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
Okay, carried. 
 

Bill No. 73 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 73 — The 
Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise this afternoon to enter into the debate on Bill No. 73, The 
Insurance Amendment Act. I’ve had a lot of my colleagues have 
the opportunity to speak to this bill already, and I’m happy that 
I was able to benefit from their knowledge and their remarks 
and enter my 2 cents on this before it finally makes its way into 
committee. 
 
This bill is going to make several changes to how insurance is 
provided across the province, but also includes some 
housekeeping amendments as well. It includes a new section 
that addresses medical assistance in dying, and that being a new 
thing in this country pursuant to some changes with respect to a 
Supreme Court ruling, Mr. Speaker, and then subsequent to that 
some legislative changes federally, Mr. Speaker. As a result of 
that being now legal in some respects, that results in some 
provincial legislative changes that therefore need to happen, Mr. 
Speaker. So I can’t even think off the top of my head how many 
things would need to change as a result, but I suppose insurance 
would be one of them. 
 
So the change in this bill will state that if an insured person 
receives medical assistance in dying, they will be assumed to 
have died from the illness or disability for which they received 
assistance. And I think if that’s reading the way I think it’s 
reading, it addresses a concern we’ve been hearing from some 
folks that when an individual has chosen to use medical 
assistance in dying, on their death certificate will be marked 
“suicide.” And that’s not comfortable or appropriate for both 
the deceased as well as their friends and family who wanted to 
see this change that their death certificate should in fact reflect 
the fact that they are dying from the disease. Now this isn’t 
changing the death certificate necessarily, Mr. Speaker, but it 
will change how it’s treated under insurance purposes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There’s also a new section being added to this Act which allows 
for more recovery options for survivors of interpersonal 
violence. And I stand in this House too often to speak about 
Saskatchewan’s high rates of interpersonal violence and how 
much more we need to do as a community and as a province to 
address this crisis, Mr. Speaker. So I’m happy to see that this is 
being put in place in The Insurance Amendment Act, but we do 
need to do so much more as a province, Mr. Speaker. 
 



4044 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2018 

We put forward private member’s Bill No. 609, which calls for 
some workplace supports that we’ve been calling for for the last 
two years. It’s the fourth time we’ve put it forward. This 
government refuses to pass it, still hasn’t passed it, although to 
their credit they have passed some other legislative options that 
we have presented to them in opposition. They still refuse to 
pass the five paid days’ leave, Mr. Speaker, despite the calls 
from those who work on the front lines of this issue: PATHS 
[Provincial Association of Transition Houses and Services of 
Saskatchewan] for example, many folks in the transition house 
sector, Mr. Speaker, the YWCA [Young Women’s Christian 
Association], the University of Regina, and so on and so forth, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there’s many studies that have shown that . . . And PATHS 
in particular did a study with respect to Saskatchewan and 
showed how beneficial that legislative change would be for 
survivors of interpersonal violence and how, in fact, the cost on 
employers would be very minimal. I know that some employers 
have spoken out, some employer groups have spoken out 
against the bill, but we also saw the same thing frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, when the call came out for maternity leave, that there 
was some pushback. 
 
But ultimately the cost for this provision is actually quite 
minimal on employers, and that’s seen through Australia for 
example who’s had the provision in for a while now. And 
they’ve found that the cost is quite minimal and that the folks 
who are using it, there’s a small percentage that use it and when 
they use it they only use about a day or so, Mr. Speaker. But 
those who do use it desperately need it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with respect to this particular bill, I’m happy to see that there 
is a provision in place to allow for more recovery options for 
survivors of interpersonal violence, Mr. Speaker, but I do want 
the government to remember that there are many other things 
we can be doing to ensure that we’re adequately providing the 
supports that we can as legislators to survivors of interpersonal 
violence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when we have the highest rates in the country amongst 
provinces, we should be doing everything we can and, at a 
minimum, bringing ourselves up to the level that other 
provinces are at. If anything, I think we should be leaders in 
addressing this and we should be actually working on a 
domestic violence provincial strategy, which I know the 
government about a year ago said they were going to do. From 
what I’ve heard, it’s stalled. It may not be happening anymore, 
which is a real shame, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also there’s the domestic violence death review panel, which 
was created about a year and a half ago, two years ago, and we 
still haven’t seen a report come out on what their 
recommendations are, even though I know, because I speak to 
the folks that are in the group, that their work has been done 
and that report has been concluded for a while. I’m not too sure 
what the holdup has been but it’s . . . Again I am happy to see, 
like I said, the provision in this bill, but there is much more that 
we could be doing, Mr. Speaker. And I hope that it’s not dollars 
and cents that are getting in the way. 
 
Some other changes in this bill, Mr. Speaker, include a new 
definition of “unlicensed insurer,” a new subsection which 

makes it a requirement for licence applicants to comply with the 
regulations. There’s some changes to ensure that a managing 
general agent or a third party administrator can only act on 
behalf of an insurer if they hold the appropriate licence. It also 
includes some changes to the penalties associated with 
insurance licensing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I know that there’ll be some questions at committee. One of 
the questions I’m thinking, and I’m looking at the minister’s 
remarks when he moved second reading of this bill, he 
mentioned that The Insurance Act was passed in the spring of 
2015 but had not yet been proclaimed into force. So I’m curious 
to know what has been taking so long in proclaiming that into 
force. What I see, that there’s been some consultations with 
industry stakeholders that had identified some minor technical 
wording issues. They’re being addressed in this legislation. So 
I’m curious to know more about the original consultation 
process that happened back when The Insurance Act was 
created prior to 2015, what work had happened prior to that and 
why it took this long for a consultation to occur and why it’s 
taking so long for The Insurance Act to be proclaimed. 
 
The worry is that if they didn’t do their due diligence, the 
government didn’t do their due diligence back in 2014, perhaps 
2013 when The Insurance Act was originally drafted, it’s 
concerning, Mr. Speaker. And it’s concerning that we’re 
already having to have an amendment Act to a legislation that 
was just passed, 2015, but because there were errors in it there’s 
already . . . They haven’t been able to proclaim it, Mr. Speaker, 
which is what we’ve seen from this government several times. 
Again and again and again, Mr. Speaker, a lack of consultation 
and then, once they put something forward, they get pushback 
from stakeholders and pushback from the people who know and 
who are affected by the decisions that we make in this House. 
And had they consulted with them to begin with, we wouldn’t 
have been in this position in the first place. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know I’m going to have the opportunity to 
ask questions at committee. I look forward to that opportunity. I 
look forward to spending time with the minister. Nothing like 
going to committee on a beautiful spring day. So as such, I’m 
ready to allow Bill No. 73 to move on. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 73, The Insurance Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 73, The 
Insurance Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 



April 25, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4045 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 99 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 99 — The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2)/Loi modificative 
no 2 de 2017 sur l’interprétation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise this afternoon to speak to Bill No. 99, The Interpretation 
Amendment Act, and I very much look forward to this bill 
moving on to committee. 
 
Now this is an interesting bill, Mr. Speaker. This bill seeks to 
repeal the definition of privatize from Bill 40 and substitutes the 
following: “‘privatize’ does not include a winding-up and 
dissolution of a Crown corporation.” 
 
Now this is essentially a partial repeal of Bill 40, the bill that 
we saw just get passed after much protest from the opposition 
side, passing on to the government what we’ve been hearing 
from the larger community — that they saw through the 
government’s backdoor plan of selling off Crowns, that the 
definition of “privatization” did not mean what the government 
was trying to pretend that it meant, that selling up to 49 per cent 
of a Crown did not constitute privatize. And the government 
rammed it through, rammed through Bill 40 despite all the 
protestation, despite how many people were upset. 
 
And now, look where we are now. After spending hours and 
hours at committee with the Minister of Justice, the now Deputy 
Premier, the minister of Justice at the time, where the 
government and the minister and the committee members all 
supported this Bill 40. Every single Sask Party MLA [Member 
of the Legislative Assembly] supported that definition of 
privatized. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Here we are now with Bill No. 99, partially walking back Bill 
40. So how did we get here, Mr. Speaker? When Bill 40 was 
tabled we heard quite an uprising from the province, Mr. 
Speaker. Thousands and thousands of people were attending 
protest rallies, writing their MLAs saying, this is not on for the 
province of Saskatchewan. The people of Saskatchewan support 
our Crowns. They value our Crowns and they don’t want to see 
those Crowns be diminished in any way. They saw through the 
government’s attempt for a quick fire sale on as much of their 
Crowns as they could get their hot little hands on, as my 
colleague would probably say. And they fought very hard 
against this bill. 
 
And I do want to take this opportunity to acknowledge and 
thank all of the community leaders who organized rallies, who 
organized letter-writing campaigns, who have been signing 
petitions, who fought hard and continue to fight hard against 
Bill 40 and are continuing to fight. And why do I say continuing 
to fight? Because, Mr. Speaker, this is just a partial repeal. 
 

Last summer . . . I think it was last summer. Last summer just 
before we sat in the fall, the then premier, Brad Wall, came out 
with a Facebook Live video and told the people of 
Saskatchewan that he listened and as a result he was going to 
repeal Bill 40. He was going to repeal what his government had 
just done a few short months ago, Mr. Speaker. He had seen the 
light. He had heard the call of Jesus. He was ready to repent. 
 
And then what we get is Bill No. 99. And we looked at Bill 99 
and we thought, hmm, this isn’t quite what the premier said it 
was going to be. Because it’s not a full repeal of Bill 40. It’s a 
partial repeal of Bill 40. 
 
I’m not sure if the government thought that, you know, we 
couldn’t, you know, we couldn’t sell off the Crowns straight . . . 
[inaudible] . . . we couldn’t, you know, try to privatize half the 
Crowns, upwards of half the Crowns through Bill 40. But 
maybe we could, you know, try this other route. The front door 
was closed; the back door was closed. Let’s try the kitchen 
window, Mr. Speaker, or up the chimney perhaps. There’s a 
few windows that I’m sure the Sask Party’s going to try to gain 
a quick buck off of our Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have seen through that. They’ve 
seen through this partial repeal. And when we’ve asked 
questions of the minister about this in question period, the 
minister has told us, and I think the Premier has also told us that 
this partial repeal . . . that the intention was a full repeal. 
 
And I hope I’m not putting words in the mouth of the minister. I 
do hope that . . . I do trust in the sincerity of members that the 
intention is to repeal all of Bill 40, but there was some advice 
given to government from those on that side — I’m not sure if it 
was counsel or it was other people who were giving this advice 
— that they still needed the wind-down section because they’ve 
sold off STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company], which 
is a whole other conversation we can have, and maybe we will 
have, Mr. Speaker. I haven’t quite decided how long I feel like 
speaking about this bill today. But I do know I’ve got a lot of 
bills to speak about this afternoon, me and my good colleague, 
the member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre, holding down the 
fort this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So they’ve said, you know, now hold on; don’t panic. Don’t 
anybody panic; we’re only repealing half of Bill 40 because we 
needed to wind down STC. So the presumption is that as soon 
as STC’s wound down that the remainder of Bill 40 will then be 
repealed. But STC is wound down now, so I’m not too sure 
what’s taking so long, Mr. Speaker. I’m not too sure why we 
aren’t seeing the government table an amendment to this bill to 
call for the full repeal of Bill 40. 
 
And knowing how legislative proceedings work, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m not sure why they wouldn’t have just done that in the first 
place, understanding that this bill would take a while before it 
would finally get to a vote, Mr. Speaker. So forgive me if I’m, 
you know, a little bit untrusting, Mr. Speaker, but I do hope 
that, as the minister had alluded to in question period, that he 
would be open or would consider amendments put forward by 
the opposition. I didn’t realize that all of a sudden the minister 
was incapable of amending his own legislation. But if he wants 
the opposition to do that, then fine, maybe we will choose to do 
that. I’m not sure. Don’t want to give away all my cards in my 



4046 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2018 

hand. 
 
Anyways, Mr. Speaker, this is interesting. And we’re obviously 
very concerned, Mr. Speaker, because we saw what happened 
with STC. And we’re still hearing from people across this entire 
province how valuable that Crown was to them. Was it turning 
a profit? No, but the value it had on so many people across the 
province was immeasurable. Providing that public 
transportation was necessary, especially in a province like ours 
— small population, spread far apart. It was what bound us 
together as a province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We hear folks up North who are hitchhiking into the city, who 
are putting themselves in dangerous situations to try and get to 
where they need to go. We’re hearing from elderly people in 
rural locations who can’t get to their medical appointments, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re hearing from small-business owners in small 
towns who relied on STC’s parcel shipment process to be able 
to get parts sent to them, to be able to send parcels out, Mr. 
Speaker. We hear from newcomers to Canada, who relied on 
STC to get around the province because they’re working 
through the process of obtaining a licence, Mr. Speaker. These 
are just a few examples of how important STC was to this 
province. 
 
This government consulted with nobody before they ripped that 
service away, Mr. Speaker. They decided they wanted that 
quick fire sale, and they didn’t care who it affected, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s why we have the Crown corporation 
protection Act, Mr. Speaker. It’s our covenant with the greater 
province that we, as legislators, are going to respect our Crowns 
for the intergenerational, multigenerational asset that it is, Mr. 
Speaker, and we are not going to mess with them, Mr. Speaker. 
This government has completely ignored that covenant, Mr. 
Speaker, with the Saskatchewan people and it’s very 
disappointing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the people of Saskatchewan rose up, they spoke loud and 
clear against Bill 40. Part of that was because of what they saw 
happen to STC, how they didn’t get a say. There was no 
referendum. This did not go to the electors. The government 
didn’t talk about it during the 2016 election. They didn’t talk 
about it during the Meewasin by-election which just happened a 
few months before Bill 40. I think it was Meewasin. Yes. Bill 
40 was tabled in the House, Mr. Speaker, and the Saskatchewan 
people were upset. They don’t want to see that happen again. 
 
So while we’re happy to see Bill 99 come forward, it’s not 
enough. It’s not what the Premier promised Saskatchewan 
people. It’s not what Saskatchewan people are asking from us, 
and it’s not enough, Mr. Speaker. And you have to forgive us if 
we have, as Saskatchewan residents, a hard time trusting the 
Sask Party with our Crowns, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the 
stressful thing with all of this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in three separate elections, the Sask Party 
promised they wouldn’t sell off our Crowns. And I’ve already 
talked about what happened to STC, and that’s the problem that 
we’re talking about now. And that’s why we need to make sure 
that this is a full repeal, not just this partial repeal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need to ensure that what happened to STC does not happen 
to any other of our Crowns. And you can understand why we’re 

concerned. We were hearing and we were seeing through the 
lobbyists registry that meetings were happening with private 
companies, private telephone companies with SaskTel. We 
were hearing concerns about what was happening with SGI. 
And there’s no surprise that there is a lack of trust, Mr. Speaker, 
between the Saskatchewan people and this government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I’m looking forward to having the opportunity to ask 
questions about this bill, to delve with the minister into why on 
earth this wasn’t the full repeal of Bill 40, like we were 
promised. I know that the former minister of Justice had a great 
time talking about Bill 40 and how great it was at committee 
with myself and I think five of my colleagues for several hours. 
I’m sure he’d love to join the current Minister of Justice to talk 
about how great Bill No. 99 is, how even better it would be had 
it not fully repealed Bill 40, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as such, so that I can have the opportunity to ask these 
questions at committee, I am going to allow Bill No. 99 to 
move on. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 99, The Interpretation Amendment 
Act, 2017 (No. 2) be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 99, The 
Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2) be committed to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 106 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 106 — The 
Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise this afternoon yet again to speak to Bill No. 106, The 
Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Amendment Act. 
Now this bill may not be as exciting as the last bill I just talked 
about, Bill No. 99, but it’s just as important, Mr. Speaker, 
because all of the legislation that we pass in here is very 
important. 
 



April 25, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4047 

This bill, Mr. Speaker, makes a few housekeeping amendments. 
It also adds a new section that allows police services search 
orders and access to records when conducting an investigation 
into a missing person, which makes sense, I think, to me, Mr. 
Speaker. We want to ensure that police, while respecting 
privacy and whatnot, that police have the authority that they 
need to be able to conduct investigations appropriately to make 
sure that missing people are found and that these investigations 
can reach the conclusion that they need to for families. 
 
I can imagine that this would be an extremely distressing 
experience for families, if their loved ones have gone missing, 
especially if their loved ones are missing for an extended period 
of time, Mr. Speaker. I can’t even imagine what that would be 
like. It would be quite awful. And I want to thank first 
responders for their hard work, not only in these types of 
investigations but in all the work that they do, Mr. Speaker, in 
their interactions with people throughout the province, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s hard work that they do but it’s important work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill also allows for an emergency demand for 
records which could come from chiefs of police or commanding 
officers in cases where they believe a person is at risk of 
imminent harm. So I suppose this would be, for example, in the 
case of an Amber Alert. If there’s a child that goes missing, a 
chief of police would have, or a commanding officer would 
have the ability to be able to obtain more documents and more 
information than they originally could. 
 
So it’s a temporary . . . I suppose it’s a small breach or step into 
privacy, or the protection of privacy, that we all need and 
deserve and should have, Mr. Speaker. But I suppose the intent 
is an honourable one to ensure that especially, for example, if a 
child is in imminent harm that the police can do what they need 
to do to ensure that they can get the information they need to 
make sure that that child is found and that child is found safe, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:15] 
 
I just want to read a little bit into the record the provisions 
around this emergency demand for records. I think it’s 
important for us to know what it says. So subsection (2) of what 
will be new 14.5 says: 
 

A member of a police service may serve a written demand 
on a person requiring that person to give members of the 
police service access to those records that are in the 
person’s possession or under the person’s control if the 
member has reasonable grounds to believe that: 
 

(a) a missing person is at risk of imminent serious bodily 
harm or death; 

 
(b) immediate access to the records mentioned in 
subsection (3) may assist the police service in locating 
the missing person before he or she suffers any harm; 
and 

 
(c) it is not practicable to obtain a record access order 
given the urgency of the circumstances. 

 
So I suppose the question will be what constitutes imminent 

serious bodily harm or death. I’m guessing maybe it could be 
something about the individual that they believe that person is 
with, the missing person is with, and what they know about 
them. I’m trying to see here if there’s anything in the legislation 
that defines that, Mr. Speaker. But if it doesn’t, then it’s 
possible that this could be further defined in future court cases, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m not too sure if there’s other jurisdictions that already have 
provisions like this and whether or not there are other 
jurisdictions that have already determined what constitutes 
imminent serious bodily harm or death, Mr. Speaker. But I will 
be curious to know some more information about that when I’m 
at committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another provision I want to read into the record is 
14.7, a new 14.7, and it deals with how this information can be 
used, for what purpose. So it states: 
 

Notwithstanding The Local Authority Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act, a police service 
may use information and records obtained pursuant to this 
Act only for: 
 

(a) the purpose of locating a missing person or a use 
consistent with that purpose; or 
 
(b) a purpose for which the information may be 
disclosed pursuant to section 14.8. 

 
And then subsection (2) says: 
 

If the investigation into a missing person becomes a 
criminal investigation, this section does not prevent 
information and records obtained by a police service 
pursuant to this Act from being used in the criminal 
investigation. 

 
So this limits the purpose for which this information can be 
used to ensure that the grounds are and the purpose is narrow, 
so we’re respecting the fact that we need to be protecting 
privacy. 
 
And in typical circumstances there is a presumption of 
innocence and there is a process for obtaining — the name 
escapes me right now — there’s a process for obtaining further 
documents, Mr. Speaker. There’s a process for an application 
you make to the court to get access to that sort of information 
— a warrant, Mr. Speaker. There we go. I finally figured it out. 
But in extreme emergent circumstances, this is what this 
legislation is for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because it talks about, the one that I just read, 
talked about section 14.8, I do want to read a little bit of that 
section into the record. 14.8(1) states that:  
 

Any information or records obtained by a police service 
pursuant to this Act are confidential and may not be 
disclosed except in accordance with this section.  
 

So in subsection (2) it describes when that information can be 
disclosed, disclosed only: 
 



4048 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2018 

(a) for the purpose of locating a missing person or a use 
consistent with that purpose; 

 
(b) if required by law; 

 
(c) to another law enforcement agency in Canada or a law 
enforcement agency in another country under an 
arrangement, written agreement, treaty or legislative 
authority, but only to the extent necessary to further the 
investigation into the missing person; 
 
(d) if the person to whom the information or records relate 
has consented to the disclosure; or 
 
(e) in accordance with subsections (3) to (6). 

 
And I won’t read the rest of that provision into the record 
because it is quite long. But I know I will have the opportunity 
to ask some more detailed questions about this particular bill, 
Mr. Speaker, in committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one interesting provision in this bill is the 
definition in the bill for a missing person. I think it’s a bit 
interesting, so maybe I’ll read that into the record as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 14.1, which is the definition section of Part II of 
this bill, defines “missing person” as: 
 

‘missing person’ means a person whose whereabouts are 
unknown despite reasonable efforts to locate the person 
and: 
 

(a) who has not been in contact with those individuals 
who would likely or normally be in contact with the 
person; or 
 
(b) whose safety is feared for given the person’s age, 
physical or intellectual capabilities or the circumstances 
surrounding the person’s absence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, so I suppose there would be the instance where 
some people choose to go missing, who choose to no longer be 
a part of whatever world that they’re a part of, and we do need 
to respect that. 
 
This bill, to my understanding, is to deal more with if someone 
is missing and there’s reason to believe that they’re in some 
imminent harm or risk of imminent harm or death, Mr. Speaker. 
And we do need those provisions to make sure that the 
authorities have what they need to ensure that they can do 
everything they can to get people home safe, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that, I think, will conclude my remarks on this bill. Mr. 
Speaker, I know I’ll have the opportunity to ask more questions 
at committee, so I’m ready to allow Bill No. 106 to move along 
to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — Question before the Assembly is a motion by 
the minister that Bill No. 106, The Missing Persons and 
Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a 
second time. Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Designate that Bill No. 106, The Missing 
Persons and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 2017 be 
committed to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 121 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 121 — The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise this afternoon to speak to Bill No. 121, the cannabis control 
Act.  
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a piece of legislation we’ve been waiting 
for for some time. To say the government dragged their feet on 
this file is an understatement, Mr. Speaker. We were the last 
province to finally come forward with what the plan was going 
to be for what happens in this province when cannabis is 
legalized. We were the last province to come forward with what 
the legal age was going to be, Mr. Speaker. We were the last 
province to determine the retail, wholesale market layout for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And through this bill, we’re finally 
able to see some of the finer details of what that’s going to look 
like when legalization happens. 
 
Now I know because of the delays in the federal government 
world and some of the holdup with the Senate. And I think 
that’s something, some disdain for the Senate, it’s probably 
something we can get some bipartisan love on in this Chamber, 
Mr. Speaker. Some of the comments that I saw coming out of 
the Senate committee on this was comical, to say the least. It’s 
probably the kindest thing I can say about some of those 
senators’ comments on the legalization of cannabis, Mr. 
Speaker. Finally it’s rolled its slow way — pun intended — past 
the Senate, and is now making its way through the rest of the 
legislative world federally, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We don’t know for sure when cannabis will be legalized. I think 
everyone thought it was going to be July 1st. Now it’s sounding 
like it’s going to be closer to maybe early fall. We don’t know 
for sure, Mr. Speaker. But all that’s to say is that we’ve known 
for a while now that this is coming down the pipe — pun 
intended, Mr. Speaker — but I was disappointed to see how 
long it took the provincial government to finally come forward 
with a plan. 
 



April 25, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4049 

And you know, I understand that the members opposite were 
going through a leadership race, but while you are going 
through a leadership race, you’re also still running government. 
So I was concerned when I was hearing some of the leadership 
candidates’ thoughts on cannabis. None of the . . . Oh, I can’t, 
especially around the topics of legal age, Mr. Speaker. I do not 
want to speak to the presence or absence of members, so I’m 
just going to move on, Mr. Speaker. It was a bit concerning to 
see. 
 
I was happy, and we were happy to see that the government 
made the legal age be 19. It makes logical sense, which I 
always like when the government does something that’s logical. 
It doesn’t always happen, but sometimes it does. It matches 
close to what Alberta has done. It’s close to what our 
neighbours to the east, Manitoba, have done. It matches what 
we’re doing, what we have for liquor, Mr. Speaker. So we were 
happy to see that that decision was made by government, and I 
will give the government credit for doing what they needed to 
do, internally, to make sure that the legal age was 19, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That’s all to say we still do have some other concerns about, 
you know, I don’t want to give the government . . . I don’t want 
to stand here and give the government credit all afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker, because then I wouldn’t be doing my job. I know they 
can give themselves credit when they need to. I think it has 
been too much already. Let’s move on to where they’ve gone 
wrong on this bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know this isn’t particularly laid out in this bill, but it’s still 
important. It does apply to this bill. It does deal with this bill, 
but that’s the retail structure, Mr. Speaker. So the government 
has chosen, despite what came out in the government’s own 
consultation process and public survey that came out. 
 
And we heard lots of concerns about the public survey, as an 
aside. Concerns about the fact that you could make multiple 
entries into it. They didn’t really provision for the fact that 
people could enter it from multiple devices. Also you could 
participate in this survey even if your IP [Internet protocol] 
address was outside of Saskatchewan. So there was some worry 
about some outside-of-Saskatchewan influence into that survey. 
But despite that, the survey is still the survey and the survey is 
still part of the consultation process that this government chose 
to put forward. So we should talk a little bit about what the 
results were of that survey, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m hoping that I have a copy of that survey in this binder, 
that would be really nice. But what I will say is that what I do 
remember off the top of my head, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
survey was quite definitive in terms of what the province 
wanted, what the people of the province wanted for the 
wholesale side of things, Mr. Speaker. The people that 
participated in this survey were quite adamant that they wanted 
the wholesale portion of the legalization of cannabis to be done 
through public means, through SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority], Mr. Speaker. 
 
And from our perspective, that makes sense. It’s an 
infrastructure that already exists, Mr. Speaker. It’s already 
doing that regulation-type role for our system, our liquor 
system. Don’t get me wrong, there’s some challenges 

associated with that and some modernization that has to happen 
from the liquor front, but I’m concerned about us throwing out 
the baby with the bathwater when we’re going through a fully 
private route. 
 
The other concern is we’re the only province in Canada that is 
going to go through, is going to have a private wholesale 
system, Mr. Speaker. So I’m all for Saskatchewan being 
leaders. But we do have some concerns, especially when it’s 
something as new, as uncertain as legalizing cannabis, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And then from what I remember from the survey, Mr. Speaker, 
the survey indicated that I think the folks were a little bit more 
on the fence in terms of what they wanted to see for the retail 
model. But I will convey, as I have been, I will convey again 
concerns we’re hearing around the retail model as it’s been set 
out by this government. 
 
Now there’s a two-step process that we’re currently undergoing, 
Mr. Speaker, where applicants can apply and then, if they make 
it through the screening process, then they will be subject to a 
lottery system, Mr. Speaker. Now we’ve been hearing some 
concerns about the screening process. We have been advocating 
that if you’re going to go through the process and you’re going 
to go through a private retail model, that we’d like to see — 
because we’ve been hearing people in the province, 
small-business owners, entrepreneurs who want to see a leg-up 
or a benefit for Saskatchewan businesses, for Saskatchewan 
people — we feel that we should do everything we can to 
ensure that as much business opportunity is kept in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, so that we as a province can benefit as 
much as we can, as much as we should, Mr. Speaker, from the 
legalization of cannabis. 
 
We feel that this is an economic opportunity, Mr. Speaker, and 
if done right, we could have a real exciting market here in this 
province. We’re seeing a real blossoming, especially over the 
last several years, of the craft beer industry in Saskatchewan. 
And one thing that I see out of it when I hold meetings at my 
secondary office in Regina Douglas Park, which is at Malty 
National, Mr. Speaker, across the street from my constituency 
office, is the level of pride and the level of . . . It’s almost like a 
civic pride, a bit of a nationalist pride. That’s not the right 
word; a civic pride is probably the one. 
 
An Hon. Member: — A malty nationalist pride. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — A malty nationalist pride, yes, in these local 
brewers and these local business owners. The owners of Malty 
National all live essentially within a two-block radius of where 
they’re producing and selling their beer. It’s kind of a cool 
thing, Mr. Speaker, and it’s really become a community hub. 
 
We could be doing the same thing with cannabis as long as 
we’re allowing for a leg-up for local entrepreneurs. So it was 
very disappointing to see that the Sask Party has done nothing 
to provide for a leg-up for small-business owners, for local 
people. In fact, one of the provisions in the first round of 
selection is a requirement for . . . It’s a financial stress test, is 
sort of what I’ve been using as a summary way to describe it, 



4050 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2018 

making sure that they have, I suppose, sufficient capital assets, 
sufficient access to capital before they make it through the first 
round of screening. 
 
There’s some very serious, legitimate concerns that that’s going 
to weed out — pun intended — some of these local business 
owners, some of these people who really want to participate in 
this market but may not have access to multi-millions of dollars 
of capital, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know what the cut-off limit is. 
I’m not privy to that level of information, Mr. Speaker, but 
what I’ve been hearing is that the applicants aren’t privy to that 
information either. 
 
So there’s some concern about when subjectivity gets inserted 
into the selection processes, that that will be used in a way to 
narrow down who will be successful. We learned last week, and 
I was really excited that the minister was going to put forward 
some further information about how the selection was going, 
really excited to see that he chose 4/20 to do it, but very 
disappointed to not hear any further information about how 
folks were moving around that selection process. 
 
It was interesting to hear that, I think it said, 1,500 or so 
applicants were received for the limited amount of retail 
licences that will be handed out. Mr. Speaker, it’s no surprise to 
see there was so many licences. I am hearing some concerns 
from some stakeholders that there are some folks who are using 
numbered companies to submit multiple applications, even 
though they’re only supposed to put one forward. 
 
So I’m hoping then in that first round of selection process — 
and I’m hoping that this is putting the minister on notice — that 
that first round of selection process, that they’re using that 
process to ensure that multiple applicants are being vetted out, 
Mr. Speaker, and that process is maintained with the integrity 
that it needs to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re happy . . . or we understand, I suppose, the caution in not 
necessarily putting out 1,500 licences. That seems a little 
extreme. But seeing that the market, as it was starting to build 
before some of these weed shops that were opening up, Mr. 
Speaker, over the course of the last year in places like Regina 
and Saskatoon, and seeing the market that was for them, we 
were cautioning the government, warning the government that 
the numbers that they were putting forward for licences may not 
be enough to serve the need. And you might find that quite 
quickly we’re going to need to do this process again to allow 
for more licences. 
 
We do understand and think it’s probably prudent to allow for a 
restricted number of licences, but we would have liked to see 
something slightly more, maybe about a dozen more retail 
licences being offered than what are offered now. This is an 
expensive process and it’s a time-consuming process, both for 
applicants as well as for ministry officials and the third party 
that’s contracted out. So we don’t want to see it have to go 
through a process again in short order, when we see that the 
market is what it is. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’re looking forward to seeing more details 
about how the first phase worked, and I know business owners 
are very anxiously awaiting the results of the first phase in 
particular. They really want to know the results of the second 

phase. I was disappointed to hear that it’s going to take quite a 
bit longer before we know the results of the second phase, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There’s many business owners who are eagerly awaiting to 
know whether or not they get those retail locations, and once 
they get that permit they’re going to have a lot of work that they 
need to do. They’re going to have to find space to rent. They’re 
going to have to work to obtain product, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
going to have to apply . . . They’re going to have to hire 
employees, Mr. Speaker. It takes a while to get a business off 
the ground, and you can’t really start that process in advance 
too much, because of the way the system works. If you’re not 
successful in getting a retail permit, there’s . . . Any other way 
of doing this type of work is illegal, Mr. Speaker. So you don’t 
want to spend too much time or spend too much capital setting 
up a shop that you may not have access to. 
 
So I encourage the minister to ensure that this process moves 
expeditiously so that these business owners can get the job, or 
get the work that they need to do so that they can be ready as 
soon as cannabis is legalized, because, Mr. Speaker, the whole 
point . . . well one of the points of legalizing cannabis is to do 
what we can to cut out the black market. And if these business 
owners aren’t ready to go in time for the legalization of 
cannabis, it could take several months for these business owners 
to be able to know if they’re successful, and then to get their 
businesses off the ground. It’s defeating the purpose and the 
black market is still what’s taking precedent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We do also have some concerns about, as I had said already, 
about the warehousing side of this. So we’ve talked a lot about 
the retail permitting process. There’s also a warehousing 
permitting process going on at the same time. That piece we 
know even less about in terms of when that’s going to be 
completed. I look forward to getting more details from the 
minister at some point about this. We’ve heard a lot of 
questions about what that’s going to look like. How many 
licences are going to be handed out? I think the last time I saw 
some media about this, I think the minister said, I think he said 
unlimited. Or I think he said that they weren’t sure how many 
yet. 
 
So we have some questions. We don’t know yet if it’s just 
going to be one person who gets a licence or if it’s going to be 
10 people who get a licence. If they’re going . . . and the 
government has decided to go through the private route, you 
know, there’s an opportunity there for, like I was talking about, 
the craft beer market, how there could be an opportunity for 
smaller businesses to have permits. I’m not sure if there’s a plan 
to just have one large business. 
 
In any event, there are some similar concerns to the wholesale 
permitting process as there is to the retail permitting process 
around the financial stress test. That piece is in the wholesaling 
piece as well. So we’re not sure who that’s going to weed out 
— pun intended, Mr. Speaker — and who’s going to be able to 
qualify for one of those permits. 
 
That’s a pretty lucrative permit to get. I would say all of those 
permits are quite lucrative to get, but wholesaling in particular 
is going to be a really big piece of the pie. It’s going to be a 
really important permit. It’s going to be a really important piece 



April 25, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4051 

of this whole new regulatory and economic sphere that we’ll 
have in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m looking forward to hearing more details from the 
minister about this process, about what the requirements are. 
I’m not totally sure if this is similar to the retail process, that 
there is a first-stage screening process and a second-stage 
lottery process. I don’t think I’ve seen any of that in the media 
yet. So we’d have some concerns if there isn’t some sort of 
objective portion to that licence being obtained. 
 
But that’s another one actually, Mr. Speaker, that now that I 
think about it is even more in need of being expeditious than the 
retail permitting process, because that’s going to be, like I said, 
a very large piece of how this is going to roll out. Those 
successful retail applicants will have to utilize the wholesaler to 
be able to get their product, Mr. Speaker. So the wholesaler’s 
also going to have to be set up and ready to go for the retail 
locations to be able to utilize that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I see that I do have the survey. I think this is 
the survey . . . yes, the survey, Mr. Speaker, that was done by 
the government. I do want to talk a little bit more about what 
the people of Saskatchewan wanted to see with respect to this. 
 
Now I would say . . . Here’s one in particular. The survey asked 
what requirements should be considered in developing rules and 
regulations for cannabis retailers. The vast majority of 
respondents wanted to ensure that there were some 
requirements around whether minors should be allowed in the 
premises and where retail cannabis stores can be located. Now I 
think this bill has a provision in there regarding minors being 
allowed in the premises — and that they’re not, and that there’s 
some authority for investigators to ask folks for their ID 
[identification] for proof of age if they’re in there. As well as, I 
believe, police have that authority as well. 
 
I don’t think there’s anything in here about where retail 
cannabis stores can be located. I can’t quite recall. I do know 
that a large piece of that is going to be municipal, that 
municipalities are going to have to make that decision. And 
we’re starting to see municipalities actually have that 
consultation and have that discussion. I think I just saw 
Saskatoon has been talking about this lately, along with North 
Battleford. Frankly, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been reading so much, so 
many news articles across the province, about cannabis over the 
last year now, that it all sort of starts to blur together, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Municipalities have a large role to play in this, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re starting to talk about that right now and where the stores 
can be located, what they’re allowed to be around, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re hearing a lot of concern from municipal leaders that they 
feel that a lot of this regulatory burden, the financial regulatory 
burden, is going to be on them and that they’re not getting the 
cut of the tax revenue that they feel they should get. And we 
agree with them, Mr. Speaker. Some of these bylaw 
enforcement pieces are going to be quite, quite important, Mr. 
Speaker, as well as some concerns around policing, Mr. 
Speaker, and whether or not there’s going to be an extra cost 
associated with that. 
 
I know, for example, the Regina police and the Saskatoon 

police have a bit of a difference of opinion on how much that’s 
actually going to cost them. It’s a pretty significant difference 
actually, Mr. Speaker, but I think it’s fair to say that there may 
be an increase. In any event, the province should be ensuring 
that they have what they need to make sure that this new 
process gets rolled out and continues to be in effect as safe as 
possible, Mr. Speaker. So that’s one of the things we have been 
calling on, Mr. Speaker, because we have been hearing that 
from municipal leaders. And we’re interested to see what more 
of the municipalities do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:45] 
 
There are a lot of municipalities that the province has agreed to 
provide retail location permits for. I think there were a few 
municipalities that actually chose to opt out. Five of them that 
opted out were Pilot Butte, Biggar, Kindersley, White City, and 
Shellbrook. Mr. Speaker, there are the other municipalities that 
were granted permits. I have that list somewhere. Mr. Speaker, I 
certainly have that list somewhere. It’s several different 
locations. I know that there was, I believe, the government used 
a minimum population limit to choose who would be entitled to 
these permits. 
 
So the permits that are going to be made available will be 
located in the following communities: Assiniboia, Battleford, 
Canora, Esterhazy, Estevan, Fort Qu’Appelle, Humboldt, La 
Loche, La Ronge, Lloydminster, Maple Creek, Martensville, 
Meadow Lake, Melfort, Melville, Moose Jaw, Moosomin, 
Nipawin, North Battleford, Outlook, Prince Albert, Regina, the 
RM [rural municipality] of Corman Park, the RM of Edenwold, 
Rosetown, Saskatoon, Swift Current, Tisdale, Unity, Warman, 
Weyburn, Yorkton. 
 
One thing I read that was kind of interesting recently was 
around . . . actually something I was surprised to read was that 
in the states where cannabis has been legalized for a bit now, 
they found actually that the communities where these cannabis 
stores were located in, these retail locations, the property values 
of the homes around them have actually risen, which I was 
actually a bit surprised by. Where I live in the city we had quite 
a few of those shops open up. I never went into any of them but 
I did walk by them on the street, Mr. Speaker. And you know, I 
was surprised to hear that that would have gone up in . . . would 
cause my property to rise in value, Mr. Speaker. It was very 
interesting to learn. 
 
So I guess that’s to say, that’s to add to what I was talking about 
earlier. Regina’s only getting six retail permit locations. I think 
when the police chief started in Regina, he started to shut them 
down. We were sitting at about 12, I believe, 12, 13 retail 
locations, none of whom I entered into, Mr. Speaker. It was 
about 13 locations. But although I did not enter into any of them 
and I live quite close to them, I could see how busy the traffic 
was around those locations, how many people were coming and 
going. And actually what was interesting was how some of the 
businesses beside them were actually doing more business. 
There was just more traffic, foot traffic coming in. 
 
So all that’s to say is that . . . That’s again to express the 
concern that six retail permits may not be quite enough for 
Regina, that perhaps a few more might have been the smarter 
move, Mr. Speaker. But we are going to wait and see how this 



4052 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2018 

whole thing rolls out. 
 
Moving to the bill in more specific detail . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Oh yes, pun intended, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Moving to the bill in more specific detail, from what I 
understand based on what I’ve heard in the media and what I’ve 
seen in the legislation, I believe the intent of this legislation was 
largely to mirror what we are doing with liquor and move it into 
this sort of context. So some of the provisions around the 
authority, some of the structure is largely analogous to what we 
see in how we handle liquor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One thing that’s interesting that I do want to point out, Mr. 
Speaker, to those who are listening, as I believe there is 
something in here. Yes, it’s 1-4, Mr. Speaker. It’s at the 
beginning of the bill. It states that this bill does not apply to 
cannabis for medical purposes. It says: 
 

Unless otherwise prescribed, this Act does not apply to the 
consumption, possession, distribution, purchase or sale of 
cannabis for medical purposes that occurs in accordance 
with the requirements of the applicable federal law. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, while I’ve been doing an extensive amount of 
outreach and consultation with respect to this, to the 
legalization of cannabis and how it will be effected and how 
folks want to see it effected in Saskatchewan, I’m hearing a lot 
about medical cannabis and I’m hearing a lot from medical 
cannabis users and the problems that they’re experiencing in the 
system that they are forced to deal with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now from my understanding, the federal government has not 
given authority to the provinces. They haven’t delegated their 
authority over to the provinces to deal with medical cannabis. 
So that’s still a federal jurisdiction issue and this is actually 
separate and apart from medical cannabis. So we’re hearing a 
lot of folks talk about medical cannabis as if the province has 
the authority to deal with it. Unfortunately, we don’t. And those 
who go through the medical cannabis stream still have to deal 
with the federal government, which means that they can’t go to 
a front-line store, they can’t go through a . . . There’s no 
storefront for them. They have to go online, on the phone, to 
deal with the federally regulated licensed producers. They have 
to deal with somebody who may or may not know their 
particular ailment, their particular issue. 
 
And another concern we’re hearing is that there’s a requirement 
for you to have a credit card to be able to access those federal 
licensed producers, and that actually inhibits many folks from 
being able to obtain medical cannabis. If they don’t have a 
credit card, then they can’t get medical cannabis. And it’s 
actually quite expensive, Mr. Speaker, and from what I’ve 
heard, the quality is not quite up to snuff yet. And that’s what 
happens sometimes when government gets all — pun intended 
— when government gets involved with, gets up to, gets in the 
business of growing weed, I suppose, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a really important thing that we need to be talking about, 
and I do think that we should be calling on the federal 
government to be doing a better job in the medical cannabis 
stream. We’re so focused on retail cannabis and what that 
means that we’ve lost focus on this also very important stream. 

And many folks are feeling caught between the cracks. Many 
folks are feeling left out of this conversation. 
 
When recreational cannabis is legalized, there are certain things 
that . . . Only a certain kind of cannabis is going to be legalized. 
It’s just dried-form cannabis, Mr. Speaker. So many folks rely 
on cannabis oil, for example, and they need that particular oil 
and that’s what they have found works for them. That’s not 
going to be legalized, Mr. Speaker. That’s still only legal 
through the medical cannabis stream, Mr. Speaker. So when 
you have all these limits to being able to get that and we’re so 
focused on the retail cannabis side, it’s leaving a lot of folks in 
the lurch, Mr. Speaker. And they’re coming to us because 
they’re frustrated because their members of parliament aren’t 
listening to them. 
 
And they’re seeing all of this attention, all of this focus on retail 
cannabis, and they’re frustrated and rightly so that . . . I can’t 
hear what the member from Moose Jaw is yelling at me, Mr. 
Speaker. If they’re frustrated with . . . If they’re having a 
difficult time getting access to the medical treatment that they 
need and that works for them, Mr. Speaker, that’s a problem. 
We need to ensure that we’re doing what we can to lift up their 
voices to ensure that the federal government steps up to the 
plate and also reviews the medical cannabis sector. 
 
From what I’ve read, Mr. Speaker, the federal government says 
that they’re going to take I think the next five years, or in the 
next five years they’re going to be reviewing medical cannabis 
and how that’s working in light of recreational cannabis being 
legalized. And I have some pretty serious concerns about 
what’s going to happen in the meantime. All these folks that we 
talk to that desperately need this medication . . . And I do and I 
stand by saying that it is medication because it does help a lot of 
people, Mr. Speaker. I had a meeting with someone who has 
stage IV cancer who it’s the only thing that . . . Cannabis oil is 
all he has to help with his chronic pain, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s an important piece of the discussion that sadly I think is 
being lost out of this whole thing through the excitement of 
recreational cannabis, and understandably so. The piece that’s 
being lost is those who rely on the medical cannabis and how 
difficult it is for folks to be able to obtain what they want, Mr. 
Speaker. So I did want to point out that provision in the bill and 
the fact that . . . Because I do think that there’s some confusion 
jurisdictionally as to who has what power over what — that the 
province does not have the power to issue retail locations for 
medical cannabis providers; they only have the power to issue 
retail locations for recreational cannabis providers. 
 
There’s a few other concerns that we had with respect to the 
bill. I understand there’s some powers in here, that there’s a 
cannabis authority that’s going to be created. So we’re curious 
to know more details about that cannabis authority. That’s 
another piece that I’m thinking is probably supposed to be 
similar to what we see for the Liquor and Gaming Authority. 
Mr. Speaker, I’m curious to know if there’s going to be a 
separate . . . if that’s going to be rolled into SLGA — pun 
intended — or if that’s going to be something completely 
separate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is also some concerns that we’ve raised already and I 
want to raise again around some of the powers that are provided 



April 25, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4053 

to officers. So one of them in particular is set out, I think it’s set 
out in section 4-4. And I’m just going to read this into the 
record, Mr. Speaker. It states: 
 

For the purposes of administering and enforcing this Act 
and the regulations, a police officer may: 
 
(a) at any reasonable time, enter and inspect: 
 

(i) a premises for which a cannabis permit has been 
issued; 

 
(ii) any other premises, place or conveyance that the 
police officer reasonably believes is being used for the 
sale, possession, consumption, transportation or 
distribution of cannabis in contravention of this Act and 
the regulations; 

 
(b) make any inspection, investigation or inquiry that the 
police officer considers necessary regarding cannabis 
permits and related activities; 
 
(c) subject to subsection 4-10(3), at any reasonable time, 
enter any place or premises containing any record or 
property that is required to be kept by a permittee pursuant 
to this Act or the regulations or that relates to the sale, 
possession, consumption, transportation or distribution of 
cannabis, and inspect those records or that property; [and 
then] 

 
(d) in order to produce a record in readable form, use data 
storage, information processing or retrieval devices or 
systems or other devices or systems that are ordinarily used 
in carrying on business at the place or premises; 
 
(e) make a copy of any record described in clause (c) or, if 
the police officer is unable to make a satisfactory copy, 
after giving a receipt remove and retain the record for any 
period the police officer considers reasonable; 
 
(f) with respect to a person who is in, or has been in, a 
premises and to whom the police officer believes cannabis 
may have been furnished: 
 

(i) ask the person for proof of his or her age; and 
 

(ii) make other inquiries of the person; 
 
(g) with respect to a person who may be a minor in a 
premises for which a cannabis permit has been issued: 
 

(i) ask the person for proof of his or her age; and 
 

(ii) make other inquiries of the person. 
 

Now I have no concern about a police officer entering a retail 
permit location and asking for proof of age, but I am concerned 
about what “make other inquiries” of this person means, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s quite broad. And also I’m concerned about the 
ability for the police officers to have the power to inspect at any 
reasonable time the records of that property, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s systems in place to ensure that businesses — and this 

will be a business, a legal business — has the ability . . . 
There’s processes for police officers to obtain warrants and 
things like that to ensure that privacy is being protected, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[16:00] 
 
When we’re giving police officers this kind of power, 
especially in a system like this when we’re talking about 
legalizing cannabis, you can understand why there’d be some 
caution. You can understand why there’d be some hesitancy. 
Mr. Speaker, there is some stigma still attached to cannabis 
users. That stigma is not going to necessarily go away just 
because it’s been legalized. 
 
So there’s some concerns as to why this much power is being 
provided to police officers to get this kind of detailed 
information, this type of information from businesses about 
who their clients are and who’s utilizing their services, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I imagine the wider public would be concerned about that 
too. I imagine those customers to those businesses are going to 
have some concerns once they realize that these provisions are 
in place, Mr. Speaker. So I’m going to be asking some 
questions around why that authority is necessary, Mr. Speaker, 
when I have the opportunity to ask questions of the officials at 
committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because I think it’s important that what we’re doing, while 
we’re making sure that the system is safe, is respecting these 
customers, Mr. Speaker. Considering the government that we 
have now, you would expect that they wouldn’t want a whole 
lot of government infringement or government fingers in these 
businesses. But we see provisions like this in legislation, and 
they raise some flags for us. We just want to ensure that 
people’s rights are being respected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And like I said again, this is going to be legal, Mr. Speaker. 
These are legal businesses. While we do think that it’s 
important that there be provisions, especially for the cannabis 
authority to ensure that everything that’s happening, that these 
permit holders, these businesses are following the regulations 
and following the law, Mr. Speaker, we do have to be cognizant 
of the other challenges as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the last thing I want to talk about with 
respect to this bill, the concern that we have around — and I 
brought this up before when I asked questions about this — 
around some of the other provisions in this bill and whether or 
not they’re actually enforceable. Mr. Speaker, there is a 
provision in this bill, and I can’t quite find it right now because 
frankly I’ve been talking for a long time and everything’s 
starting to look a little blurry — pun also intended — that I 
think that there is a rule in here that stipulates that you cannot 
have cannabis in your vehicle unless you are travelling from the 
point of purchase to point of consumption, Mr. Speaker. And 
well that reminds me that there’s some questions that we should 
talk about around where you’re allowed to actually consume 
cannabis. So I hope I don’t forget that before I sit down, but it is 
important to talk about the restrictions around having cannabis 
in your vehicle. 
 



4054 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2018 

So when I first learned this, or I first learned this was a 
provision in the bill and I first read that, one of our . . . I 
realized that this is quite similar to how we treat a restricted 
firearm. You can’t have, so you can’t have . . . For example, 
you can’t go to a retail location, pick up your, you know, the 
cannabis, the legal cannabis you’re allowed to have because it’s 
legal, and go perhaps to fill up your car with gas or go to the 
grocery store, run some errands before you head on home. No, 
you’ve got to . . . the government, Big Brother, wants you to go 
directly to the point of purchase, to the place of consumption. 
Do not pass go. Do not stop. Do not collect $200, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are some pretty major concerns. First of all, why we’re 
treating cannabis like a restricted firearm, Mr. Speaker. And 
second of all, how on earth is this going to be enforceable? So 
how is . . . If someone pulls someone over, how will the officer 
be able to prove that you weren’t driving home at that time? 
And how much manpower or person power is going to be spent 
enforcing a rule like that, Mr. Speaker? I’m guessing not a ton, 
Mr. Speaker, but then why are we putting this provision in 
place? 
 
And then I learned, I think it was from the minister’s comments 
in the media — and I thank him for this information — that is 
actually the rules around alcohol, that you cannot have alcohol 
in your vehicle, and that simply this rule is mirroring what we 
have for liquor, which was a surprise to me, Mr. Speaker. I 
didn’t know that I could go to a liquor store, pick up my bottle 
of wine, and I had to go straight home. I could not stop for gas, 
could not go get groceries. That’s unreal to me, Mr. Speaker. I 
had no idea. 
 
And clearly that’s not being enforced. And I don’t know why 
we’re putting new legislation forward that’s based on 
legislation that’s not really enforceable to begin with, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t know why we’re . . . I guess some of these 
provisions come from our history of prohibition, Mr. Speaker, 
and what’s flowed out of that. But why are we doing that in this 
new sphere? It doesn’t make sense to me. I’m not a fan of 
unenforceable legislation, Mr. Speaker, and so that’s just why 
I’m putting those concerns on the record. 
 
Now I thought that was the last thing I was going to say about 
this bill, but there’s one more thing I wanted to say about this 
bill that I remembered, was the provisions around where you 
can consume cannabis. So from my understanding you cannot 
consume cannabis in a public location. So parks, streets, 
basically anywhere essentially, you’re not going to be able to 
consume cannabis. You also can’t consume cannabis in the 
place of purchase so we can’t have shops where you can . . . 
Yes, no pot shops where you can smoke and then walk home, 
because we wouldn’t want . . . You know there’s also rules in 
place around driving. There’s a zero tolerance rule around 
driving. That’s a different bill so I won’t speak about that right 
now. 
 
But I do want to raise the concern — and this actually also 
flows out of another bill but all of these are interrelated — that 
because of the rules around you not being able to consume 
cannabis in public, those who are renters, if your landlord 
chooses, as is provision under another bill that we’re debating 
right now in second reading, if the landlord chooses to state that 
you cannot consume cannabis in your rental location, you 

cannot smoke cannabis in your rental location. Renters don’t 
really have a place where they can smoke cannabis. You better 
hope that they have a friend who owns a home who has that 
private residence that they can live in. 
 
Again this is pretty restrictive. Again I’m raising a flag about 
the enforceability of something like this, Mr. Speaker. I know 
you could walk down Vic Park right now and probably see a 
few folks imbibing on something that’s not necessarily legal. 
And I’m not totally convinced that that’s going to go away once 
cannabis is legalized, Mr. Speaker. I’m not saying whether or 
not that’s appropriate. All I’m saying is that as legislators we 
should ensure that the legislation that we’re passing is 
enforceable or as enforceable as we can make it. 
 
So I think I’ve expended all of the comments I wanted to make 
with respect to this bill. Frankly I’ve run out of steam. And I 
know I’ll have the opportunity to ask questions at committee, 
but I do have other colleagues who want to enter in debate on 
this bill. So I’m going to adjourn debate on Bill No. 121. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Douglas Park has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 121, The Cannabis 
Control (Saskatchewan) Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 122 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that. Bill No. 122 — The 
Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2018/Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi 
intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise in debate once again this afternoon to speak to Bill 121’s 
sister bill, Bill 122, the cannabis control consequential 
amendments Act, 2018. 
 
Now I know members opposite really are hoping that they’re 
going to hear me speak for another 40 minutes on cannabis and 
all of the concerns and all of the interesting issues that pertain 
to the legalization of cannabis in Saskatchewan. It is actually a 
really interesting thing that’s going on, Mr. Speaker. And it is 
going to be interesting to see it all roll out, Mr. Speaker — once 
again, pun intended. 
 
But I think I’ve put all my remarks on this legislation on the 
record when I talked about Bill No. 121. So as such I know I 
have other colleagues who are also going to want to talk to Bill 
122, and I’m going to at this time adjourn debate on this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Douglas Park has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 122, The Cannabis 
Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2018. 



April 25, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4055 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 127 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 127 — The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Always 
good to take my place in this Assembly and join the debate on 
the matters before us, in this case Bill No. 127, The Income Tax 
Amendment Act, 2018. 
 
Now the bill itself relates to other pieces of legislation that we’ll 
get to later in the agenda here, Mr. Speaker. And anyway it’s 
always interesting to see the approach of members opposite to 
the tax code. And certainly coming on the heels of last year’s 
budget, the measures contained in this year’s budget are of 
course very much, they refer to very much what had gone 
before. So I guess file this one under measure once, cut twice, 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of the personal income tax rate changes 
that were announced last year, wherein there’d be a two-stage 
reduction. An initial half-point reduction on July 1st, 2017. 
Well, they made it for that one, Mr. Speaker. And then a second 
half-point reduction on July 1st, 2019. That one’s been frozen 
in this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again, if you’ll cast your mind back, that was part of the 
then minister of Finance, the member from Regina Northeast 
. . . Got to see him the other day, out for lunch with the former 
member from Regina Douglas Park at one of the finer 
Vietnamese establishments in this town, Mr. Speaker, and it 
was good to see them doing well. I’m sure they were getting 
ready to pay the, you know, not just the bill for their meal, but 
the expanded PST [provincial sales tax] as well on that fine 
repast, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But certainly when the budget was introduced last year, there 
was a lot made of the way that this was going to finally get us 
off the income tax roller coaster. And that of course has shifted 
this year into, you know, we’re going to get off the resource 
revenue dependency. But at the time, Mr. Speaker, there was a 
lot made that they needed this big, expanded focus on PST 
expansion, on consumption tax expansion, to get us off the 
income tax roller coaster. And of course the reductions that 
were referenced, Mr. Speaker, again the half-point reduction, 
again July 1st, 2017, and then the second one which was to 
come, well that’s been frozen, and that is accomplished in this 
piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there’s not much reference given to the fact that, you 
know, what’s this going to do to the great move, the great 
policy shift on the part of that government, to moving off the 
income tax roller coaster and getting into consumption taxes. 
Because they certainly got into the consumption taxes, Mr. 

Speaker. But as regards to the income tax shift, you know, zap 
you’re frozen, you know, seeing as we’re all interested in the 
sayings of Pierre Elliott Trudeau these days in the House. 
 
Oh, and I hear the tax freezer herself, the tax-cut zapper herself 
talking from her chair, and you know it’s always interesting to 
see. Oh, and now the member from Martensville is upset and 
saddened and I think disappointed in me — more so than usual, 
because normally her approval is, I have to say, kind of scarce, 
Mr. Speaker. And you know, every day though, I get up and 
soldier on despite that. But you know, you do what you can. 
You do what you can. 
 
[16:15] 
 
But again, it’s an interesting budget that we’ve got in front of 
us, Mr. Speaker, in terms of Bill No. 127, and again, the big sort 
of bold news that were ballyhooed in last year’s budget and the 
way that some of that stuff is silently or quietly taken out with 
the trash in this budget, Mr. Speaker. But again, the promised 
income tax reduction frozen, frozen in this particular budget, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Bill 127 also involves the existing . . . And again I’m referring 
to the minister’s second reading speech from April 24th — in 
Hansard of course, Mr. Speaker, so any mistakes of course are 
my own in the quotation here. But I’ll try to be as faithful to the 
speech as I can, Mr. Speaker. But in terms of the legislation 
maintaining the existing provincial infirm dependent tax credit 
and caregiver tax credit, quoting from the minister’s second 
reading speech: 
 

In its 2017-18 budget, the federal government announced a 
consolidation of federal caregiver-related income tax 
credits into a single Canada caregiver [tax] credit. 
Saskatchewan will not mirror the federal change in order to 
ensure that dependants who are currently eligible to be 
claimed under these tax credits remain eligible. 

 
I guess in this case, Mr. Speaker, it’s good to see, you know, if 
the feds jump off a cliff, that the province doesn’t have to jump 
off as well. But they’re certainly . . . Good to see that they’re 
making sure that those eligible dependants can still be claimed, 
and certainly for folks that are claiming that caregiver tax 
credit, Mr. Speaker, there’s often a significant tax need there, 
income support need there. So we’re glad to see that part of it. 
 
Again, you know, following the lead of the . . . or, you know, 
responding to federal moves where: 
 

In October 2017, the federal government announced an 
adjustment to the taxation of non-eligible dividends, 
generally those received from small business corporations, 
beginning in 2018. As a result of the linkage between the 
federal and provincial personal income tax systems, the 
federal change would automatically increase provincial 
income taxes on this type of dividend income. To offset 
this potential increase to provincial income taxes and to 
maintain the current level of provincial tax on non-eligible 
dividends, Saskatchewan will amend provincial legislation. 

 
This is one that I’d be interested to hear more about and 
certainly will look to the good work of our Finance critic taking 



4056 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2018 

up the line of inquiry in committee, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 
tax implications of this and in terms of how the expenditure is 
booked in the budget, how many filers this will apply to, the 
particulars of the measure, Mr. Speaker. But again this is 
something that we’ll be interested to see how this plays out in 
terms of the way that federal-provincial relations are carried out 
and as impacts Saskatchewan, and whether or not . . . Is this one 
where the province has been asleep at the switch? Or does it 
advance the Saskatchewan interest, Mr. Speaker? We’ll be 
mightily interested to see. 
 
In terms of the . . . Again we’ll get into these in further debate, 
Mr. Speaker, but anticipated in Bill 127, there’s also mention of 
the value-added ag incentive and the Saskatchewan technology 
start-up incentive. And again on these two measures, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ll be interested to see more of the rationale in terms 
of the particulars. Again with the technology start-up incentive, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen this government go around the block a 
few different times in a few different ways on this particular 
policy front, Mr. Speaker, introducing, repealing, trying to 
figure out, you know, what the heck’s going on, it would seem. 
 
But certainly, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the tech start-up 
initiative, we’ve got a great cluster in tech in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, and anything that will genuinely help out that growth 
sector in this economy, we would look on that favourably, Mr. 
Speaker. But as ever, the devil’s in the details. And we’ll be 
interested to see if this is just a matter of this government 
parcelling up taxpayers’ dollars to hand over to different 
organizations to help them as they move out of the province. 
We’ll be interested to see what sort of safeguards are there in 
that regard, Mr. Speaker. We’ll be interested to see in terms of, 
does this genuinely help out start-ups or does it add advantage 
to established players and sharpen their already significant 
presence in the sector? So again we’ll be looking at that one 
closely and, you know, examine more, on a more thorough 
basis in committee, I am sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
As regards to the value-added ag incentive, again, Mr. Speaker, 
you know, diversifying the Saskatchewan economy and 
diversifying the ag sector is something that numerous 
governments have thrown a lot of effort at over the years. We’ll 
be interested to see how that one takes place, and perhaps I’ll 
save my discussion of that for a more close discussion under the 
bill directed at that itself, Bill No. 125. 
 
But again on that, Mr. Speaker, we’ll have questions on the 
threshold that was arrived at in terms of eligibility, in terms of 
refundable versus non-refundable, how that plays out. The 
administration, ease of administration, there will be a number of 
questions certainly for that front, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And certainly mid-year, this government introduced the 
increase of the small-business income threshold from 500,000 
to 600,000, Mr. Speaker. And again in terms of anticipated job 
spin-off, in terms of anticipated economic activity that would 
usher forth from this threshold increase, you know, in terms of 
where this came from on the part of the government, you know, 
it had the hallmarks of the government looking for something to 
change the channel from some particularly bad moves that they 
made in the budget to, you know, try and rally up their 
credentials as somehow a defender of small business — small 
businesses, many of which that government had increased the 

PST burden upon mightily in the last year’s budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I get that they needed something to be able to go out and 
say, look, isn’t this a great thing? But in terms of being able to 
explain the benefit of it, in terms of anticipated job growth, in 
terms of anticipated economic activity, Mr. Speaker, and how 
that would in turn offset the increased . . . the billion-dollar tax 
increase that went with the PST expansion, an increase in last 
year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, that discussion was, and I’ve . . . 
You know, it’s a funny thing about this job. Sometimes you get 
to follow it live in committee and sometimes you’re home and 
you tune in on Hansard TV. And, Mr. Speaker, that was when I 
followed from the home front and it didn’t . . . I’m sure it made 
about as much sense live and in concert, Mr. Speaker, as it did 
on television, which is not to say very much, which is to say not 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again there are a number of things that, you know, Bill No. 
127 sets out to accomplish as part of the budget and is subject to 
the requirements under the budget around the amount of time 
that we’ll have to debate. But again, Mr. Speaker, I think the 
big picture for Saskatchewan people is still they can tinker 
around the edges on some of these things, but it’s pretty hard to 
get over the billion dollar tax increase that went with last year’s 
budget. 
 
I know other of my colleagues will have more to say on this 
front, Mr. Speaker, but for the time being, I’d move to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 127, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
127, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 128 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 128 — The 
Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2018 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
You know, picking up where we left off under the last piece of 
legislation, again in terms of the . . . There’s some tinkering 
around the edges that went with this year’s budget. There is 
some helpful things, for sure, provided in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. But again it’s against this backdrop of the billion 
dollar tax increase that went with last year’s budget. So they 
can rearrange the deck chairs on that particular Titanic, Mr. 
Speaker, all they like, but it doesn’t take away from the fact of 
the significant impact that has on business, on small business, 
on organizations throughout the province, and certainly on 
families, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the impact of last year’s 
budget. 



April 25, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4057 

But as to the particulars in this one, and again it’s . . . You 
know, you pay attention to what’s happening in this place over 
time, Mr. Speaker. And you know, there’s this old saying that, 
you know, history happens the first time as a tragedy and the 
second time as farce. You know, the removal of the PST off of 
used vehicles, Mr. Speaker, the way that that was put forward in 
the 2007 budget. 
 
And mind you, I can also remember when this government, in 
opposition was talking about how they were going to take off 
gas tax or provide some kind of a gas tax rebate, Mr. Speaker. 
And you know, I’ll be interested to see if we hear anything 
about that in the days to come from members opposite because 
again, the price of gas is going up. And in opposition they 
certainly had a lot of things to say about it but, you know, threw 
that to the sides come the hustings in 2007. 
 
But one thing they did run on and certainly had some fancy 
things to say about it, was the removal of PST from used 
vehicles in the 2007 election. I think the then leader of the Sask 
Party, soon to be premier, Brad Wall, talked about, you know, 
having a tax on used vehicles was a stupid idea. You know, it 
certainly gets the point across, Mr. Speaker, but again what was 
stupid back then is now soon to be government policy, Mr. 
Speaker, and brought to us courtesy the work of Bill No. 128, 
The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2018. 
 
And again they’ve tried to dress it up with, you know, coats and 
hats and scarves and all this, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the 
$5,000 ceiling, Mr. Speaker, or the way that that’s going to be 
adjudicated post facto by SGI, Mr. Speaker. You know, for 
people that preach the values of small government, they keep 
having these plans to come forward that involve an awful lot of 
government intervention to make them happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that they’re that desperate to go after something that they’d 
once decried as a stupid tax, Mr. Speaker, you know, having 
screwed up the way that trade-ins are an incentive and quite 
helpful to people selling cars in this province, Mr. Speaker, in 
the last budget they compound that by, you know, reversing 
course, but again engaging in something that they’d once 
decried as stupid. 
 
So I guess, you know, to borrow from the great sage, Forrest 
Gump, Mr. Speaker, “stupid is as stupid does,” I guess would 
be one of the takeaways there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:30] 
 
In terms of . . . Again other things that are updated in the 
legislation, there’s, oh, an exemption on the PST for naloxone 
and certain other non-prescription drugs used to treat 
life-threatening conditions; an exemption of PST on prepared 
food and beverages sold by charitable or non-profit 
organizations at concessions. Again, Mr. Speaker, these would 
seem to be pretty straightforward, but again get into the kind of 
territory that you have when you expand the PST so massively 
onto food and onto restaurant meals, Mr. Speaker. These are the 
kind of, you know, in terms of the food sold at concessions . . . 
Again this is a government that ran on, in 2106, the home-based 
business, sort of special treatments, Mr. Speaker, to enhance 
the, I don’t know, the sale of pies or cookies or what have you. 
 

And again, Mr. Speaker, great. But all of those initiatives take 
on a certain ironic hue, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the way 
that — again with no consultation, going back on years of 
policy for that government — the PST was massively expanded 
onto restaurant meals and onto many items of food. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s again perhaps a sign of a government 
that’s grown in its desperation, where the chickens are coming 
home to roost in terms of bad choices that have been made, in 
terms of revenues that have been blown through, and where 
you’ve got to paper it together. But you know, I can well 
remember the petitions being delivered in pizza boxes and all of 
that, Mr. Speaker, and aided and abetted by many of the 
members opposite.  
 
And I also know, Mr. Speaker, that in terms of what’s 
happening for PST impacts in the constituency that I have the 
privilege to represent, Mr. Speaker . . . The downtown is a big 
part of the great riding of Regina Elphinstone-Centre, and the 
impact that that has had — that PST expansion, Mr. Speaker — 
to employment and to businesses and their bottom line all the 
way through Regina Elphinstone-Centre it’s, you know, like 
job-killing comes to mind, business-killing comes to mind, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of the impacts that this government is having, 
I know, throughout what has been a thriving part of the 
economy in Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, what a shame that, you know, they 
brought this in under the guise of oh, we’re going to shift to 
consumption taxes and get off the income tax dependency. But 
what a shame they didn’t feel so as emboldened to share that 
with the electorate at electorate times and say, hey, we’ve got 
this great idea, this great policy initiative. We’re going to shift it 
onto, we’re going to expand the PST onto restaurant meals. 
Yes, no, we thought that was stupid in other years, Mr. Speaker, 
but here we are, you know, what do you think? And I think they 
know what people would’ve thought of that, which is why of 
course it was brought in last year. And for the tinkering that 
goes on in this particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
not going to turn that damage around. 
 
We’ll be interested to see what a chilling effect, what a hurtful 
effect their ongoing changes make to the sale of used vehicles 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. And, you know, there’s a great 
thing went around on social media the day after the budget, the 
day of the budget, you know, trying to guess how many cars do 
you think are going to be . . . used cars are going to be for sale 
at $4,999.99, Mr. Speaker? And of course the government’s 
answer to that is that they’re going to send in SGI to do a bunch 
of after-the-fact evaluations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It sounds like they’re making up some of these things as they go 
along. It sounds like it’s a pretty small back of the envelope that 
they’re making up some of these things on, Mr. Speaker. So 
we’ll be interested to see how this all comes out in the wash, 
Mr. Speaker but again in terms of the damage that was done in 
last year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, particularly under the heading 
of the provincial sales tax, that damage goes on, is real, and is 
not turned around by this piece of legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know other of my colleagues will have more to 
say on this front so at this time I will move to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 128, The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2018. 



4058 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2018 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
128, The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2018. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 124 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 124 — The 
Environmental Management and Protection (Environmental 
Handling Charges) Amendment Act, 2018 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Again, good to join debate, take my place and get a few 
thoughts on the record as regards Bill No. 124, The 
Environmental Management and Protection (Environmental 
Handling Charges) Amendment Act, 2018. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, there’s a fairly interesting speech put on 
the record April 23rd, 2018 by the Minister of the Environment 
as regards different of the desired impacts of this particular 
piece of legislation. But in the main, Mr. Speaker, it’s about 
increasing the amount that the government takes in terms of 
deposit and essentially moving what you pay on a . . . Here we 
go. Again, so as to get this as straightforward as I can, Mr. 
Speaker, it was again put over the side by the government in 
advance of the budget in a pre-budget release March 23rd. 
 
March 23rd, was that a Friday? I think it was. It was a Friday. I 
stand to be corrected on this but of course, you know, there’s 
nothing like . . . Always keep an eye out for those releases 
coming on a Friday, Mr. Speaker, because the government I 
think, you know, regards them as taking out the trash or, in this 
case, the recycling, and again, in terms of what people are 
paying, Mr. Speaker, for the actions of this government. And 
that’s often where that news shows up, is on a Friday. 
 
So in terms of the pre-budget release, they want to get these 
things out over the side before the budget, Mr. Speaker, to focus 
on, you know, how you’re kicking resource revenue 
dependency or whatever other sort of watch-the-birdie exercise 
you’re trying to engage in while you’re, you know, making 
people pay more and get less. In terms of what happened with 
the environmental handling fees, this particular piece of 
legislation will enable an increase of 2 cents on the 
environmental handling charge for all recyclable beverage 
containers purchased in Saskatchewan. 
 
And you know, very important to point this out, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Environmental handling charges are an amount paid by the 
customer at the point of purchase. These charges are not 
returned when the deposit is refunded; rather they are used 
to fund the contract the government holds with Sarcan to 
deliver the beverage container collection and recycling 

program. 
 
Moving further down in the minister’s speech, it is referenced 
that: 
 

Program sustainability is the core reason why amending 
EMPA 2010 and increasing the environmental handling 
charge at this time. Based on calculations of current 
funding and program costs, and with input from our 
recycling program operator Sarcan, the current handling 
charges will sustain the program until approximately 2024. 
Under these amendments, government will retain the total 
revenue generated by the 2 cent increase until renegotiation 
of the Sarcan grant in 2020. This is the renewal period for 
the ministry’s four-year grant agreement with the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres, 
known as SARC, and its recycling division, Sarcan. Sarcan 
receives environmental handling charges based on 
container sales volumes from two years prior. This is why 
we’re increasing the fees now, so that the funds are 
available when the Sarcan contract is renewed. 

 
Carrying on in the speech, Mr. Speaker: 
 

At the time of renewal in 2020, we are proposing that 
Sarcan would receive 1 cent from the handling charge 
increase, which would sustain the program until 2030. The 
additional 1 cent will allow for flexibility in the event that 
the beverage container program’s financial situation 
changes and offset the need for increased fees in the near 
future. It will also support administrative costs endured by 
government with respect to operating recycling and other 
waste management programs in the province. It is 
important to note, Mr. Speaker, that the environmental 
handling charge has not changed in Saskatchewan since 
1992. 

 
Mr. Speaker, In terms of, again, just to give you some context, 
as a kid, like I had a paper route and, you know, delivered flyers 
and did what I can to make a little walking-around money in 
that regard. But one of the other ways the McCall kids certainly 
made money, Mr. Speaker, was collecting bottles, collecting 
cans. And you know, I don’t know if it was like this in 
everybody’s case, but in the McCall household we were very 
attuned to what was happening for the deposit that you’d get 
back when you took it in to the SBA [Saskatchewan Brewers’ 
Association] or into then SARC [Saskatchewan Association of 
Rehabilitation Centres] or what happened, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, I can recall when it went from a cent to 2 cents 
for a beer bottle, Mr. Speaker. And you know, who could 
imagine it going up to a whole 5 cents? Perhaps the member 
from Cannington did some bottle picking in his time too and 
he’s looking to chime in here too. 
 
Anyway, so you know . . . There were some occupational 
hazards to be sure when it came to picking bottles, Mr. Speaker, 
you know. Like try not to cut your hands on them; that would 
be a good one. Or you know, when somebody finds out your 
good bottle picking spots and gets to them before you do on the 
weekend, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as a kid, my brothers and my sister and I, we were quite 



April 25, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4059 

well attuned to what was happening for the deposit. So when I 
first heard this I could of, I just thought, you know, it’s going 
up by 2 cents. Well that must be going back to, you know, what 
you get in the deposit. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, I want to also go on record here and 
say, you know, the people at Sarcan and SARC generally do a 
tremendous job. And the way that that, the way that SARC was 
established I believe or, you know, provincialized in . . . You 
know, far be it from me to pass up an opportunity to say, you 
know, even the Grant Devine government got a few things right 
and this would be one of them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’ll print that on a T-shirt. 
 
Mr. McCall: — I await the T-shirt offerings from the member 
of Martensville. But certainly, Mr. Speaker, you know, credit 
where credit is due. That was a good thing. That was a good 
thing. 
 
And I know that . . . You know, my particular Sarcan depot, 
over by Humpty’s, Mr. Speaker, it’s the big depot in North 
Central and it gets a lot of business, Mr. Speaker. And there are 
people that, they’re kind of like urban miners, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of the collecting bottles. And that is the way that some of 
those folks supplement some very meagre incomes. 
 
And you know, it’s a great piece of work that Sarcan does, both 
in terms of recycling where I think our conversion rate is 
something on the order of 80 per cent which is, you know, quite 
a high level in the national comparison, Mr. Speaker, but also in 
terms of, you know, providing employment for folks that may 
not have many other employment opportunities; in terms of 
recycling and, you know, care for the environment, and in terms 
of again providing that income for folks that, when you think 
about it, work very hard for what those few dollars represent. 
So when I’d heard the word that, you know, the fee was going 
up by 2 cents, I thought, oh that’s, you know, there’s going to 
be a lot of rejoicing down at the Sarcan by Humpty’s. But that’s 
not the case, of course, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:45] 
 
The fee is going up those 2 cents, and again there’s some time 
lag in terms of how that gets disbursed, and some of it, you 
know, will rightfully be going to the folks at Sarcan to 
underwrite their operations and to pay the cheques for the folks 
that work there — again a great thing, Mr. Speaker — in terms 
of the other cent, that’s going to be rolling back into the 
ministry and into the nebulous void of administrative pressures, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I don’t know if the instructions went forth from cabinet and 
said, you know, here’s a way where you can sort of, you know, 
get some cash on hand in terms of the cent that the ministry will 
be keeping under its purview to deal with, again, administration 
or associated pressures, and what those are precisely. I know 
that we’ll have many questions on that front to come. But in 
terms of that 2 cents on a can or, you know, on the 5 cents or on 
the 7 cents or, you know, pick your item, Mr. Speaker, that of 
course is not going to be handed back over when all my urban 
miner friends go into Sarcan and look to get their deposit. 
There’s no increase to the payday for those folks, Mr. Speaker. 

Because this government, as imaginative as it is in terms of 
ways to find to raise revenue . . . I mean last year they said, hey, 
hey, universities, go back out and like, you know, raid your 
reserves. Or hey, we’ll tear up grants-in-lieu, Mr. Speaker. Like 
there are a lot of really imaginative ways that this government 
went at covering up for their mistakes, Mr. Speaker. But in this 
case that they’d go after that 1 cent from the 2 cent increase to 
the handling fee, this one’s got to be up for a prize or 
something, Mr. Speaker. In terms of all those people that’d be 
looking forward to that extra 2 cents on the can or the bottle or 
what have you, well it ain’t coming. It ain’t coming, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I understand that there are costs to all these things, and I’d 
refer you to my earlier remarks that the member from 
Martensville is going to put on a T-shirt and all that to remind 
me for the rest of my life. But you know, Sarcan does a lot of 
great work, but it ought not be seized upon as a way to go out 
there and squeeze out some extra revenue on the part of this 
government so that they can underwrite the mistakes that they 
have made. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be . . . I’m sure to have more questions 
on this matter in the days to come. But one thing is for sure, the 
people that, you know, have that very limited time for political 
matters and, you know, these things dawn upon them as they go 
to pay their bills or as their paycheque comes in and it’s less or 
what have you, Mr. Speaker, I know that those people that 
heard 2 cents increase to the handling fee, they’re going to be, 
you know, maybe thinking that that would be passed on through 
to the deposit. And that is not the case, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Anyway, I know other of my colleagues will have more to add 
on this bill, but with that I move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
124, An Act to amend The Environmental Management and 
Protection Act, 2010. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
124. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 125 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 125 — The 
Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I once again recognize the member 
from Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
You’re probably wondering, you know, why the opposition 
couldn’t have gotten it together in the Speaker’s list and, you 
know, trade off one against the other, but, you know, that 
occurs to me too. 
 
Anyway, good to join debate this afternoon on Bill No. 125, 
The Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act. 



4060 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2018 

Again, I’d referenced this early on in debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I guess one of the main questions we’ve got for this one, there 
are a few questions arise, but in terms of again referring to the 
member from Meadow Lake, the minister’s second-reading 
speech of April 23, 2018 Hansard . . . Again, thanks for all the 
great work, Hansard. But in terms of the threshold of $10 
million, quoting the minister: 
 

This Act will position Saskatchewan as having a very 
attractive host of incentives for those companies looking to 
grow in our province. Qualifying projects will include new 
and existing value-added agricultural facilities with $10 
million in new capital expenditures. To be eligible, a 
project must demonstrate that capital expenditures were 
made for the purpose of creating new productive capacity 
or increasing existing productive capacity. Redemption of 
the benefits is limited to 20 per cent in year one after the 
facility enters operation, 30 per cent in year two, and 50 
per cent in year three . . . [And] a maximum carry-forward 
of 10 years on any remaining credit amount. 

 
Ten-year carry-forward. So I guess again, Mr. Speaker, a 
number of questions that arise here. We want to see our ag 
sector grow and develop, Mr. Speaker, diversify. And I guess 
some of the questions that we’ll certainly have in committee, 
Mr. Speaker, one that automatically recommends itself is, why 
the figure of 10 million? What underserved part of the incentive 
host was, you know, kicked up the threshold of $10 million? 
 
Is there a particular project that they have in mind or projects 
that they have in mind, Mr. Speaker? Will that await the 
post-budget, you know, staunching up of the government’s 
fortunes, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the selling of the budget? 
What do they have in mind in terms of actual projects? 
 
And it’s hard to sort of . . . When you see specific figures like 
that in a measure, Mr. Speaker, you’ve got to know that they’ve 
been tailored in some regard for a particular . . . like there’s 
something obviously on the mind of the government. So you 
know, I guess let’s let the cat out of the bag, you know. Let us 
in on the secret. What is this specifically targeted at, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Because again in terms of, you know, what happened with the 
expansion on PST and the deleterious effect that’s had on the 
construction industry or, you know, different of the tos-and-fros 
that have come with the tax sector or, you know, pick your 
measure, Mr. Speaker. Is this particular measure custom-made 
for sets of initiatives or an initiative in particular? And, you 
know, let’s hear it out. Let’s see how that measures up, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Again in terms of there’s a lot of vague language about more 
jobs, diversifying the economy, but again in terms of booking 
these things in proper estimates that we all know that the 
members, you know, in Treasury Board, they should be going 
through these things in terms of what is the predicted impact of 
these measures. What is the uptake going to be? What is the 
spinoff in terms of jobs and economic activity? And also, Mr. 
Speaker, the carry-forward of 10 years in terms of the unused 
credits, how that was arrived at. 
 

But again, these are all sort of . . . They should be some 
relatively hard and fast details that went into the decision made 
on this particular initiative. So I guess what I’d beseech the 
government is to let the province in on it, and let’s see what this 
is specifically being aimed at, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I guess, well some of the other questions we’d have, Mr. 
Speaker, would . . . In terms of companies being required to 
apply to the government for a Saskatchewan value-added 
agriculture incentive certificate, that’d be one where we’d be 
interested to see what sort of safeguards there are made against 
shifting of capital exercises, Mr. Speaker. What sort of . . . 
Again, as has happened with other incentives offered by this 
government and other governments, is it going to go to 
Saskatchewan value-added, or is there a way that this can be 
circumvented, and activity that takes place outside of 
Saskatchewan is booked against the tax credit? How does that 
work, Mr. Speaker? What sort of safeguards are there for the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers that are putting up these precious 
dollars? 
 
In terms of, again, the $10 million and in terms of the . . . For 
the threshold on new capital, in terms of submitting to 
inspections from government officials to ensure that all rules 
are being followed, we’ll be interested to see what the intended 
regime is for those efforts, Mr. Speaker. And again, in terms of 
the year one after the facility enters operation, how these are all 
sort of accounted for under the law will be most interesting to 
see. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I could go on, with but the limits of the 
hours of the day to constrain me, Mr. Speaker. But anyway, 
we’ll be interested to see, again, what this is specifically geared 
at and, you know, so people can make up their own minds as to 
the value or the benefit of what it is and the rationale that has 
gone into the particulars on this particular measure. Is it 
borrowing from best practice in other jurisdiction? What does 
this do for our competition throughout Western Canada, comes 
to mind. What does this do in terms of the existing, sort of, the 
host of incentives that are already on offer? Why was this 
particular part of the front seized upon when you’ve got this — 
again, to use the minister’s word — host of incentives on offer? 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I know other of my colleagues will have 
more to say on this score, but it will certainly make for an 
interesting discussion at the committee level. But for me in this 
debate, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 125, The 
Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
125, The Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. It now being very near the 
time of adjournment, this House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4029 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4029 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4029 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4029 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4030 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Canadian Cancer Society Daffodil Month 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4030 
 Administrative Professionals Day 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4030 
 Saskatoon Librarian Receives Movers & Shakers Award 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4030 
 Wynyard Teams Win Provincial Tournaments 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4031 
 Shaunavon Chef Inducted into Canadian Culinary Championships Hall of Fame 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4031 
 Gala Evening Raises Funds for Fanconi Anemia Foundation 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4031 
 Community Support for Industrial Millwright Course in Churchbridge 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4032 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Challenge on Constitutionality of Federal Carbon Pricing 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4032 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4032 
 Emissions Reduction and Prairie Resilience Strategy  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4033 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4034 
 Evaluation of Carbon Capture and Storage 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4034 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4034 
 Availability of Government Official 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4035 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4035 
 Mental Health Services for Children 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4035 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4035 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4036 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4036 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Government of Saskatchewan Challenge to Federal Government Carbon Tax 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4037 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4037 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4038 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 95 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal and Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4038 
 Bill No. 97 — The Arbitration (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4038 
 Bill No. 98 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Family Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 2017 
 Loi modificative diverse (résolution des conflits familiaux) de 2017  
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4039 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4039 
 Bill No. 104 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, 2017 
 Code des droits de la personne de la Saskatchewan de 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4040 
 Bill No. 105 — The Saskatchewan Human Rights Consequential Amendment Act, 2017 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4040 
 



 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Withdrawal of Privilege Case 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4041 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4041 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 123 — The Snowmobile (Fees) Amendment Act, 2018 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4041 
  Brkich (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 4042 
 Bill No. 91 — The Snowmobile Amendment Act, 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4042 
  Brkich (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 4042 
 Bill No. 110 — The Animal Protection Act, 2017 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4042 
  Brkich (referral to Economy Committee) ............................................................................................................................. 4043 
 Bill No. 126 — The Energy Export Act 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4043 
 Bill No. 73 — The Insurance Amendment Act, 2017  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4043 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 4044 
 Bill No. 99 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2017 (No. 2) 
 Loi modificative no 2 de 2017 sur l’interprétation 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4045 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 4046 
 Bill No. 106 — The Missing Persons and Presumption of Death Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4046 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 4048 
 Bill No. 121 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4048 
 Bill No. 122 — The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Consequential Amendments Act, 2018 
 Loi de 2018 corrélative de la loi intitulée The Cannabis Control (Saskatchewan) Act  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4054 
 Bill No. 127 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2018 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4055 
 Bill No. 128 — The Provincial Sales Tax Amendment Act, 2018 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4056 
 Bill No. 124 — The Environmental Management and Protection  
  
(Environmental Handling Charges) Amendment Act, 2018 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4058 
 Bill No. 125 — The Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4059 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


