


















































April 9, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 38A  MONDAY, APRIL 9, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3709 
 April 9, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — Before routine proceedings, I ask that all 
members please rise to observe a moment of silence in honour 
of those involved in the Humboldt Broncos bus tragedy. 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. Why is the Premier on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave to make a 
statement. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
Premier. 
 

CONDOLENCE MOTION 
 

Humboldt Broncos Bus Tragedy 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 
the members of this Assembly for granting leave here today. I’d 
like to make a statement and, at the conclusion of that 
statement, I would like to move a motion, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition that will be 
seconding that motion in light of the most unimaginable 
incident that our Humboldt Broncos, our city of Humboldt, and 
our province and our nation has been faced with this weekend. 
 
Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted. So 
say the scriptures, Mr. Speaker. Today in Saskatchewan, 
Alberta, across the country, there are many families in 
mourning. There are many families in need of comfort, and it’s 
the extended family of the Humboldt Broncos that require our 
love and require our support the most. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so many people — too many people — bear a 
heavy burden in Humboldt after Friday’s terrible accident. But 
it is a burden that is shared by the entire province and it’s a 
burden that is shared by our entire nation. Today we stand with 
the Humboldt Broncos. We stand with all of the families 
affected by this tragedy, and we offer our prayers and our 
deepest condolence on the immense loss that they have 
suffered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the events of the last few days have left us reeling 
— in our province, in our nation, and around the world. This 
accident was shocking and it resonates so deeply with so many. 
It’s so easy for us to relate to these young men that were on that 
bus because many of us have been there. If you participate in 
sports in this province, long bus rides come with the territory. 
It’s been said that riding the bus is a Prairie rite of passage in 
our province. It’s part of growing up. It’s part of what we do. 
 
And it’s not just in sports. How many in this Assembly rode the 

bus to school? I did. How many of us have children or 
grandchildren who rode the bus to school today? Many of us. In 
hockey, the bus, it’s just sort of a locker room on wheels. It’s 
your second home. It’s a place where you bond with your 
teammates, your classmates. It’s a place where you have fun. 
It’s a place where so many memories are made. 
 
Today it is terrible to contemplate that moment when the 
comfortable, happy environment of the Humboldt Broncos bus, 
team bus, was shattered. And I think Mike Babcock said it best 
when he said, “it rips the heart right out of your chest.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the word unimaginable has been used frequently 
to describe this incident, although barely appropriate, because 
it’s difficult to comprehend what our families are going through 
right now — the families of the players, coaches, officials who 
perished, the families of those who cling to life at this very 
moment, the families of those who suffered serious injuries and 
will need years to recover and in some cases will not recover 
fully. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, imagine we must. Empathy is more than an 
expression of kind words. Empathy implores us to put ourselves 
in the place of those that have been so affected by this tragedy 
so that we can better understand their pain and their despair. 
We’re called upon to imagine what it would be like if it was our 
son, our grandson, our brother, our nephew, if it was one of 
them that was suddenly gone. We might acknowledge that this 
is a latent fear for many of us as we go about our daily lives, but 
this is how we all relate to this unimaginable incident. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you become a parent, there is tremendous 
joy. I’ve experienced that joy twice. When you hold your baby 
in your hands, so small and so helpless, the happiness, it’s 
almost indescribable. You know then, if you didn’t know it 
before, that life is oh so fragile. You worry as your baby grows 
into a young adult. The concern that you have as a parent, it 
starts to diminish, but it doesn’t go away completely. It never 
does. Because that young adult will always be your child. 
They’ll always be your baby. But at some point you need to let 
go. At some point you have to trust them. You have to trust 
them because they’re your children, that they will make enough 
good choices along the way to survive and to succeed in their 
life. You have to trust in the people and the institutions that 
influence your children. 
 
The parents of young men playing on the Humboldt Broncos 
trusted the team. They trusted the Humboldt Broncos for good 
reason. The Humboldt Broncos are a first-class organization. 
This team operates in a strong, caring community, and no time 
has that been more evident than recently. They play in a league, 
the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League, with a long, storied 
history, a league that is professionally managed and 
professionally ran. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those families believed their sons would be safe. 
But, Mr. Speaker, in this life, there are things that are beyond 
our control. In this life, there is a cruel randomness that defies 
good intentions; at times, it defies meticulous planning. A 
terrible accident occurred and we are left to imagine what it 
could be like to lose a child, to lose a husband, a father, or 
someone that is so close to us. 



3710 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2018 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, we can imagine. In 
Saskatchewan we do feel the pain and despair — our 
neighbours’ — and we feel the need to be compelled to act. 
That’s the way it is in a small town, and Saskatchewan is a 
small town at heart. In times of crisis, we have each other’s 
back. We always have. When the situation is serious, in this 
province, we mobilize. We never hesitate. We are always there 
for one another. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you saw this after the accident Friday evening. 
The courageous first responders — the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police], EMTs [emergency medical technician], the 
paramedics, STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society], our 
provincial air ambulance, all of the volunteers that came upon 
this horrific accident — heedless of the danger, they desperately 
worked to save lives. We are grateful. We are ever so grateful 
for the commitment and professionalism of each of those 
individuals and all of our first responders in this province, the 
medical teams in Nipawin, in Tisdale, and in Saskatoon. 
 
Dr. Masri was in Royal University Hospital in Saskatoon when 
the code orange was sounded. He wrote about what he saw on 
Facebook, Mr. Speaker. The passion, care, and love of the 
nurses in emergency and the intensive care unit. The physicians 
who came from everywhere to help. The respiratory therapists 
who Dr. Masri described as overlooked, silent heroes. The 
residents who stepped up to the challenge. The social workers 
who provided supports. I quote, Mr. Speaker, “May this be my 
first and final code orange,” Dr. Masri wrote to his colleagues 
on Facebook. “I never want to see what I saw again.” 
 
What an honour to know that you have all helped save such a 
large number of lives. Mr. Speaker, what an honour it is for all 
of us in this Assembly to represent such special people in our 
province. It’s humbling. It’s humbling for me. I know it’s 
humbling for each of you in this Assembly. 
 
We owe these people and others our deepest and everlasting 
gratitude. In Humboldt we witnessed the strength of Broncos 
President Kevin Garinger, who stood tall during the very worst, 
the absolute worst of circumstances, and Mayor Rob Muench, 
who said there was no playbook on how to handle a crisis like 
this, but then he led an effort that was so effective that it 
seemed to me that he may have had a playbook, Mr. Speaker. It 
seemed to me that he had plans drawn up already with the 
efficiency that he led this effort. 
 
We in this Assembly and across this province are so very 
thankful for the leadership in Humboldt at every level: the 
Broncos management, the city council, the businesses who’ve 
contributed and contributed mightily, the faith community who 
came together to offer comfort and organize last night’s vigil 
that I know a number of members of this Legislative Assembly 
on both sides attended, the schools who in the days ahead will 
offer counselling for students across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Humboldt has been challenged like few 
communities have ever been challenged in this province or in 
this nation of Canada. And Humboldt is meeting that challenge 
because, as the Finance minister and the MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] for Humboldt can tell you, the whole 
world has seen in the last three days that Humboldt is so strong. 
 

Humboldt has the backing of this province, Mr. Speaker. The 
response has been incredible from individuals across 
Saskatchewan. From La Ronge to Lafleche, support is pouring 
in — financial support, material support, spiritual support, Mr. 
Speaker, which is so important — from all corners of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And the reaction on the national level has been no less 
astounding. Mr. Speaker, I want to express my gratitude to the 
Prime Minister, Justin Trudeau, for his immediate expression of 
support and for attending the vigil in Humboldt last evening. 
The Prime Minister’s presence in the community means so 
much. 
 
[13:45] 
 
I want to thank fellow premiers from across the nation that have 
reached out. And today in many provinces across this nation 
flags are at half-mast, and I thank them for that. We are grateful 
to all of those who have contributed to the GoFundMe page, 
and in other ways, but to the GoFundMe page that has raised 
now more than $5 million and still counting. Mr. Speaker, 
there’s more than 60,000 donations to that page from over 60 
countries. It includes a donation from a seven-year-old hockey 
player who gave the money that he received from the tooth 
fairy. That little boy wanted to help the Broncos, like so many 
others in this province and in this nation and in this world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what can you say about the response of the hockey 
community? Like Saskatchewan, like our province, like our 
communities, the hockey community is close. It’s tightly knit, 
and it understands precisely what Humboldt is going through. 
As Connor McDavid said, and I quote, “Everyone has been on 
that bus before.” 
 
The tributes across North America and around the world have 
sent a clear message: Humboldt is not alone in dealing with this 
tragedy. The thoughts and prayers from around this world are 
with you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government stands with Humboldt in this very 
dark hour. Families directly affected by the accident in the 
weeks ahead will need counselling. So will first responders, 
health care professionals, students, friends, not just in 
Humboldt, but in other communities across this province. That 
counselling will be provided, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if the health care system needs additional supports to care 
for the injured, Mr. Speaker, that support will be forthcoming. 
If the city of Humboldt needs more help, this province will be 
there for that city — our city. We will do what it takes to ensure 
that Humboldt, the Humboldt Broncos, and the families 
involved can begin to heal. And we know, Mr. Speaker, that 
this recovery process is going to take some time. Life will never 
be the same for families affected. 
 
As it was put last night, Mr. Speaker, by the team chaplain, the 
wounds are many and the pain is overwhelming. But we have 
hope, and over time wounds will turn to scars. And though the 
scars will remain and will be part of who we are, over time the 
pain will not be quite so raw. Our Good Shepherd was also 
wounded, and our Good Shepherd also bears scars. Though we 
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, he is with us 



April 9, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3711 

and he understands our grief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in time, light will penetrate this darkness. In fact 
in some ways it already has. Bronco defenceman Logan Boulet 
died in that crash Friday evening, but just a few weeks ago, just 
a few weeks prior, when he turned 21, Logan signed an organ 
donor card. And, Mr. Speaker, six people will live because 
Logan took the time to sign that card. His girlfriend, McKailyn 
Ives, called Logan a hero. She called him a hero on Facebook, 
and I believe McKailyn is right. She wrote, and I quote: 
 

I am so grateful that he chose me to be such a special part 
of his life. I love you deeply and I will always cherish the 
memories you gave me. I am so proud to be your girlfriend 
and I am so proud of you.  
 

Mr. Speaker, all of us are so proud of Logan. 
 
This is our team, the Humboldt Broncos. This is our 
community, Mr. Speaker, the city of Humboldt — 
compassionate, tough, resilient, and united. These are our 
families. These are the families that we reach out to. These are 
the families that we embrace. These are the families that we 
uplift. These are the families that we support. Together we will 
get through this. Together we will persevere. Together we are 
Humboldt strong. 
 
God bless the province of Saskatchewan, and God bless 
Humboldt, and God bless the Humboldt Broncos. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by leave of this Assembly I want to move the 
following motion: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan express its 
deepest sympathies and condolences to the friends and 
families of: 
 
Adam Herold, 16 years old, from Montmartre, 
Saskatchewan 
Conner Lukan, 21, from Slave Lake, Alberta 
Evan Thomas, 18, from Saskatoon, Saskatchewan 
Jacob Leicht, 19 years old, from Humboldt, Saskatchewan 
Jaxon Joseph, 20 years old, from Edmonton, Alberta 
Logan Boulet, 21, from Lethbridge, Alberta 
Logan Hunter, 18, from St. Albert, Alberta 
Logan Schatz, 20, from Allan, Saskatchewan 
Stephen Wack, 21, from St. Albert, Alberta 
Parker Tobin, 18, from Stony Plain, Alberta 
Brody Hinz, 18, from Humboldt, Saskatchewan 
Darcy Haugan, 42, from Humboldt, Saskatchewan 
Glen Doerksen, 59, from Carrot River, Saskatchewan 
Mark Cross, 27, from Strasbourg, Saskatchewan 
Tyler Bieber, 29, from Humboldt, Saskatchewan; and 
 
In so doing, express its support for their families and 
communities in Saskatchewan and Alberta, the Humboldt 
Broncos junior hockey club, the Saskatchewan Junior 
Hockey League, and the entire province of Saskatchewan 
as they cope with this tragic loss; and further 
 
That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan express its 
profound gratitude for the courage and professionalism of 
the Saskatchewan first responders, the RCMP, and many 

medical professionals whose commitment and 
determination in the face of such a horrific tragedy was a 
light in the darkness and shall never be forgotten. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier by leave: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan express its 
deepest sympathies and condolences to the friends and 
families of: 

 
Adam Herold, 16 years old, from Montmartre, 
Saskatchewan 
Conner Lukan, 21, from Slave Lake, Alberta 
Evan Thomas, 18, from Saskatoon, Saskatchewan 
Jacob Leicht, 19, from Humboldt, Saskatchewan 
Jaxon Joseph, 20, from Edmonton, Alberta 
Logan Boulet, 21, from Lethbridge, Alberta 
Logan Hunter, 18, from St. Albert, Alberta 
Logan Schatz, 20, from Allan, Saskatchewan 
Stephen Wack, 21, from St. Albert, Alberta 
Parker Tobin, 18, from Stony Plain, Alberta 
Brody Hinz, 18, from Humboldt, Saskatchewan 
Darcy Haugan, 42, from Humboldt, Saskatchewan 
Glen Doerksen, 59, from Carrot River, Saskatchewan 
Mark Cross, 27, from Strasbourg, Saskatchewan 
Tyler Bieber, 29, from Humboldt, Saskatchewan; and 
 
In so doing, express its support for their families and 
communities in Saskatchewan and Alberta, the Humboldt 
Broncos junior hockey club, the Saskatchewan Junior 
Hockey League, and the entire province of Saskatchewan 
as they cope with this tragic loss; and further 
 
That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan express its 
profound gratitude for the courage and professionalism of 
the Saskatchewan first responders, RCMP, and many 
medical professionals whose commitment and 
determination in the face of such horrific tragedy was a 
light in the darkness and shall never be forgotten. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. “I don’t want to be 
here. I don’t want to be here, but I’m glad we are.” Those are 
the words that Pastor Sean Brandow, the chaplain of the 
Humboldt Broncos, used to start off his words at last night’s 
vigil in Humboldt where hundreds, over a thousand people were 
gathered together, coming together to share in their grief. And I 
felt that that summed up so well how we all were feeling. 
Nobody would want to see an event of this magnitude, any such 
tragedy. But when one happens, what we would want is to be 
together, to be able to come together and share in our grief, in 
our sorrow. To come together in prayer and in community. 
 
One of the people that I was watching yesterday during that 
very beautiful ceremony was a colleague of mine, Dr. Paul 
Labelle. He was my teacher in medical school. Not to make 
anything special; we all have a connection here. This is 
Saskatchewan. There’s no six degrees of separation here. 
There’s one or two. We all can find a connection with each 



3712 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2018 

other in almost no time at all. 
 
But his story particularly struck me because he told the 
StarPhoenix about how he had come upon the accident. And 
he’s an emergency physician and his initial response was, I 
want to rush out; I want to help. Of course his son was among 
those on the bus, and he needed to let those who weren’t so 
involved take care of that situation. But just that emotion, you 
know, to feel that moment — the fear, the anguish, the 
confusion, the pain. And the frustration, the helplessness of 
having all of these skills and this knowledge and wanting to 
help but knowing that you couldn’t, how hard that would be. 
 
And I think a bit about our work here. You know, we have at 
our disposal so much knowledge, so much capacity. Our job is 
to help people improve their lives, to help people be healthier. 
And there’s so much that we can do. We have so much 
influence on the well-being of the province. And yet there are 
also so many things we can do nothing to prevent and nothing, 
as much as we’d like nothing more, nothing to undo. 
 
And as I think about the way that we are all feeling with the 
people of this province, that grief and that sense of frustration, 
of wishing we could do more, 15 lives are lost. Fifteen families 
are directly affected, are hurting so much, are hit the hardest. 
 
But this is hitting us all so hard. And we all, as the Premier 
pointed out, have that connection to the road. We all live in this 
big province. So much space between us. Whether it’s for 
hockey or football or band or dance or cadets, kids are out on 
the road. For school, for work, for appointments, just visiting 
family. We spend so much time on the highways across this 
province, and we all know the joys of that travel and the joys of 
the way that connects us, and also the worries and the fear that 
is associated. These events just make . . . Our worst fears have 
come true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the members on this side, the 
members in this Assembly, the people of Saskatchewan, people 
around the world who are bringing their condolences to the 
families, the friends of the hockey players and those who work 
with them, of the Humboldt Broncos. We want to bring our 
condolences to Humboldt and to the Broncos organization, to 
all the communities that are affected. A special condolence to 
the Minister of Finance, the member for Humboldt; and the 
member for Carrot River. Now these are . . . It’s close to home 
for all of us but it’s at home for these members, and that hits 
even more. 
 
[14:00] 
 
We want also to extend our thanks, to join in extending our 
thanks to the first responders, the RCMP, the health care 
providers who worked through the night and continue to work, 
the community leaders, the clergy, everyone who’s had that 
initial response and continues to support with everything they 
can. We want to thank the House leaders and the Premier for 
allowing us to dedicate today to this, to put aside the regular 
business and focus on what really matters, focus on what really 
matters. 
 
There was a picture that was shared widely on social media. 
One of the fathers of one of the young men who was involved 

in the accident posted a picture of his son and two other boys in 
their gowns in their hospital beds, these tough young hockey 
players, reaching out, holding hands. And that to me 
symbolized so much of what we’re all going through. Every one 
of us is wounded. Every one of us is grieving, and we’re 
reaching out to each other for strength and support. 
 
Last night at the vigil, Minister Brenda Curtis from Humboldt 
asked us to do the same. We all joined hands, whether we knew 
the person next to us or whether it was a perfect stranger. The 
entire hockey arena and curling arena and school — everybody 
joined hands and reached out. And that gesture, that gesture of 
coming together is a gesture that will be repeated very much in 
the coming days as we all reach out to each other to try to 
understand, try to comprehend, try to support one another, come 
together. 
 
And it is in that spirit that I wholeheartedly add my support to 
the motion that has been put forward, because it is together that 
we will be Humboldt strong, that we will be Saskatchewan 
strong. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s with 
heavy hearts today we talk about the Humboldt Broncos. You 
know, this has affected all of Saskatchewan. It’s affected the 
whole country. And our condolences, our thoughts and prayers 
go to the 15 dead, the 14 injured, and the countless lives 
changed forever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bus driver, Glen Doerksen, was from Carrot 
River. He leaves behind his wife Karen, his son Cameron, and 
his daughter Melissa. His son Cameron was getting married this 
summer, and Glen won’t get to see that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Glen always had a smile on his face. I think it was 
even said in the paper that he always had a smile on his face, 
and he did. You know, he was quite the character, and he loved 
his sports. It was said when he was on the golf course, he could 
be heard three holes away when he made a good shot. 
 
He also was involved in the community. He was a lineman in 
six-man football, a ref in hockey. He coached basketball. He 
was a lineman in volleyball. Just a great community person 
who’s going to be missed at all. 
 
And he was a professional in his driving skills, Mr. Speaker. I 
know that for a fact. He drove semi, he drove bus, and he loved 
driving bus for the players. 
 
Mr. Speaker, throughout this tragedy I want to give credit to the 
RCMP, to our fire departments, first responders, physicians, 
nurses, STARS, the air ambulance, Social Services, and all the 
local people who came together in this trying time. This, this is 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I don’t know what more to say, Mr. Speaker. The whole 
country is grieving, and for some it will never pass. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 



April 9, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3713 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Where to start and 
what to say. These are very difficult remarks to make, but I’m 
on my feet today because I want the community of Humboldt, 
the families and the friends of all those who were on that bus, 
all those who were touched by this tragedy, to know that we 
share in your grief, that you are not alone. 
 
I didn’t grow up in a community like Humboldt where the 
hockey team, and by extension its players, these young men, are 
the heart of the community. But I did grow up in a hockey 
family, watching my big brothers, Marc and Dave, play for 
teams like the Blazers, the Contacts, the Blades, and the 
Huskies. 
 
I think my story is the story of so many people in this province. 
I have such fond memories of my time spent at the old arena 
downtown, The Barn, and the Rutherford Rink. I still remember 
the railroad trip to watch my brothers and their teammates 
square off against teams like the Notre Dame Hounds or the 
family trip we took to Billings, Montana to watch my brother 
Marc play there. In fact my first trip ever to Regina, when I was 
about 10 or 11, was to watch Marc play against the Pats when 
he played for the New Westminster Bruins. 
 
I remember the great pride I had in having brothers on these 
teams, community celebrities of sorts. I remember going to fan 
breakfasts actually at Eaton’s to have my picture taken with the 
Blades. Please don’t tell my brothers, but I was usually more 
excited to get my picture taken with the other players, anyone 
but them. I think I still have, in my childhood memento box, 
pictures of the Blades hockey cards that I collected. 
 
I know I’m not alone in this pride and excitement to know these 
young men. Doyle Fox, who works in our caucus office, spent a 
brief time playing for the Humboldt Broncos and he shared with 
me how great it was to be in that community, to simply be in 
the coffee shop and have folks come up and connect with you 
because you were a Bronco, a member of the team, a member of 
the lifeblood of the community. 
 
I remember so vividly my parents opening up their home to 
other young men who had left their families and their own 
communities to pursue their hockey dreams in Saskatoon. It 
was wonderful to be part of a billet family, to get to know these 
players. And I can still picture my parents glued to the radio to 
listen to play-by-play commentary for away games. Hockey 
was a central part of my young life and our house, as it is still 
today for so many in Saskatchewan, as it is for the people of 
Humboldt. 
 
I also had the privilege of travelling myself as an athlete on 
buses, in vans, and on planes across this province and across 
this country with my teammates. It was such a thrill to have that 
independence from your family and to head out on road trips 
with your fellow athletes with whom you’ve trained so hard and 
built such a strong bond. I especially loved the nights on the bus 
after a tournament, eating McDonald’s or whatever food was 
available, catching up, dozing off, laughing, rehashing the 
events of the day or the previous days. I’m sure my parents 
were always worried when one of their kids ventured out on 
trips like this, but I didn’t think once of the possible dangers 
when I was a teenager. I certainly do, as a mom myself today, 
when my own kids are not with me. 

We always want our children to be safe, but we do want them to 
venture out in the world, have opportunities, and grow into the 
people that they’re meant to be becoming, just like these young 
men were doing. Admittedly I am less personally connected to 
hockey these days than I once was, but I’m not completely 
distanced from this world. I still think of myself coming from 
that hockey family, with my brothers now coaching teams or 
having coached teams like the Blazers, the Contacts, and the 
Stallions, and running a hockey academy, brothers who are 
mourning the loss of and the devastating trauma to players they 
have known and coached. 
 
I have nephews who still play hockey, my brothers’ sons who 
knew and know some of these Broncos. I have parents today 
who are no longer glued to their radio but this time to their 
computer and the live stream from San Jose to listen to their 
grandson on the ice. Hockey still plays a big part of my family’s 
life, just like it does for so many people here in Saskatchewan, 
like the people of Humboldt. 
 
Although I’m not directly connected to any of the Humboldt 
Broncos team personnel or families, like so many in our 
province my heart broke on Friday night when the devastating 
news of the crash emerged. I ache as a mom, a sister, a billet 
sister, an auntie, a member of this community of connections 
that we call Saskatchewan. 
 
To the folks of Humboldt, to the families and friends of these 
players and team personnel who have lost so much, to all who 
have been touched by this horrible tragedy, including first 
responders and medical and support professionals, it is a long 
road ahead. As you’re on this journey of grief and healing, 
please just know you are not alone. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
constituency starts about 10 miles north of Humboldt. A lot of 
people in my hometown of Middle Lake have forever carried 
season tickets to the Humboldt Broncos. I now stand and speak 
for them. 
 
In rural Saskatchewan, hockey is a mainstay of the winter of 
our long Saskatchewan. The depths of the sorrow that has swept 
across Saskatchewan is like a heavy, dark fog. It’s unbelievable. 
The pain of the loss has touched every community in 
Saskatchewan — I should even say Western Canada. Now in 
our hearts they are all Saskatchewan boys. 
 
We must help each other through this painful time. We must 
pray, each one of us in our own way, for the Humboldt 
Broncos. We must pray for the friends and family that have had 
their lives forever changed. At Remembrance Day we all say, 
we will remember them. I would ask that you all now say it 
with me: we will remember them. God bless us all in our hour 
of need. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I rise to put words to loss and pain that’s 
beyond words. As such, my words will be brief and, I can 
assure you, inadequate to describe indescribable pain and loss 
that so many within our province are facing — the loss that the 



3714 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2018 

families of those on the bus are facing here today, the rooms 
furnished with a life of memories and keepsakes that are empty, 
to the teammates with empty stalls within the locker rooms 
beside them, to that incredible organization and the coaches and 
the community and all that wrap their care around those players 
and that team, and of course to a community with a broken 
heart. 
 
We stood yesterday together with thousands in solemn 
solidarity at the Elgar Petersen Arena, an astonishing display of 
love and prayer for families and for young people that have 
been hurt in ways that can’t be described. For a team, for a 
community that lives and breathes and eats hockey, for a 
province certainly that’s shaken and in mourning here right 
now, I want to extend our care to all those — our prayers, our 
love to all those that have been affected, some so deeply. 
 
I want to extend our thanks to all those that have responded in 
such a special way — the first responders, the RCMP, the 
health care workers, those providing mental health care support 
right now, the trauma teams, the leadership of the organization, 
the leadership of the SJHL [Saskatchewan Junior Hockey 
League], the leadership in the incredible hockey community 
here within Saskatchewan, right across the country and around 
the world. 
 
So we stand here today in solemn solidarity. I would highlight 
Adam Herold who captained and led the Regina Pat Canadians, 
an incredible young defenceman described as an incredible 
leader, born and raised in Montmartre. Just like all those others 
whose lives were lost on the bus that night, a tremendous loss to 
our province and our world. So I simply stand together with my 
colleagues, of those across our province and our country, to 
mourn. And as we stand together with love and prayers and 
support and understanding, let us be reminded and let us work 
to all be Humboldt strong. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Willowgrove. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
join with colleagues to add my voice of support and condolence 
to the families, players, to the city of Humboldt, and all those 
involved. 
 
I was out of province when I heard the news of the tragic events 
of last Friday night. I was in Winnipeg where I had an 
opportunity to see the outpouring of support from outside of our 
borders. I attended the Winnipeg Jets-Chicago Blackhawks 
hockey game where a magnificent tribute took place nearly 
hours after the tragic event. The national anthems were sung 
with the players at centre ice interspersed with each other — 
one Jet, one Blackhawk, and the referees as well — standing in 
a circle. The chants of “Go Broncos Go.” It wasn’t about the 
game. It was about what hockey meant, what life meant to each 
and every individual. The game was televised across the 
country and each and every player had their name bar removed 
and the name Broncos for both teams put on. 
 
The Winnipeg Jets’ public address announcer, in his now 
famous address, said hockey players, sporting figures, talk 

about not playing for the name on the back, but playing for the 
crest on the front of the team and part of a team. He said tonight 
it’ll be different, that each and every player on the ice will be 
playing for the name on the back of their jerseys, the Broncos.  
 
The 50/50 was a record number that was donated to the 
Broncos. And it was just one of many of those tributes that took 
place outside of our borders, and for that we say thank you to 
our sister provinces, to each and every province, to jurisdictions 
indeed around North America and around the world. 
 
As I drove home, I had a chance to listen to some of the coaches 
and the players and the people that talked about the game and 
talked indeed about the tragedy. The Jets coach, Paul Maurice, 
talked about being on a bus as all of us here have memories of 
doing that. But he talked about the bus being a sanctuary, about 
the families, you know, looking at the bus driving away and 
breathing a sigh of relief and saying, yes, my family is safe. My 
son or daughter are safe. But certainly that wasn’t to be the 
case. 
 
The Jets captain, Blake Wheeler, he talked . . . You know, they 
asked him, how did you, as players and an organization, pull 
something together so, so very quickly? And he just said, 
because each and every one of us have been there. Each and 
every one of the players could relate to being on one of those 
buses and knowing that, yes, it could’ve been them. The 
Premier mentioned Mike Babcock and his eloquence and the 
grief that he certainly enunciated. Todd McLellan and Glen 
Gulutzan from the Edmonton Oilers and the Calgary Flames, 
they immediately came to Saskatoon to be in the hospital with 
those and to offer their thoughts and prayers. 
 
As I drove home, people called in from California, from 
Atlanta. They talked of a game that took place in Norway where 
there was a moment of silence, so indeed it is a worldwide 
phenomenon. The hockey community, the sporting community, 
and all that’s good about sports came together in that evening. 
 
I had an opportunity to attend the vigil in Humboldt last night, 
and it was comforting to see so many members there from both 
sides of the House: the Premier and the Leader of the 
Opposition and members and MPs [Member of Parliament] and, 
you know, community leaders. And I know it meant a great deal 
because people came up and said how much it meant to them to 
have the Prime Minister there, to have, you know, other hockey 
figures like Don Cherry and Ron MacLean and Drew Remenda. 
It was very special. 
 
And last night was very special. As I left the house and drove 
from Saskatoon to Humboldt, to see along the way, and those of 
you who followed that same path will know — the farmyards, 
the signs, the “Broncos Strong,” the “Go Broncos Go” signs on 
the highway as we approached Humboldt. 
 
I drove out there with my son and we had an hour to talk about 
things, to talk about what this meant. And I asked him, you 
know, what did he do when he first heard the news? And I was 
very, very happy to hear his words. He said he and his girlfriend 
and others, they immediately went and gave blood. And you 
know, that’s very, very special. And they talked about organ 
donation as well. And we’ve talked about it in this House and 
the challenges and all that, but this is where you really see how 



April 9, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3715 

special that is. 
 
Yesterday at the ceremony, one of the most special moments 
was when we were all drawn to the attention of the clock, and it 
was 7:32 p.m. And that was when the game was supposed to be 
played but something much different was happening. And the 
names of those who perished were read and we all watched 
those families, one after one, express their sorrow and their 
grief. And one of those families are constituents of Saskatoon 
Willowgrove, the Labelle family, and they’ve been through a 
tremendous, a tremendous . . . time over the last three days. So 
to that family and to all families, you know, we just want to 
express our deep sorrow and deep regret. 
 
The analogy of the scar has been said here today. That really 
stuck with me as I was driving back to Regina yesterday. Kevin 
Garinger, the team president, said, “Pray for Humboldt today 
and every day forward. We are all Humboldt Broncos fans.” 
And as Helen Keller said, “The best and most beautiful things 
in the world cannot be seen or even touched. They must be felt 
with the heart.” Our hearts will never forget Friday, April 6th in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. When I 
heard the news, my immediate response was, this was a tough 
one. And that was the same response that I had for the La Loche 
shooting. And I can say to the people of Saskatchewan and 
Humboldt that at that shooting, Saskatchewan and Humboldt 
prayed for us; we now pray for them. From the furthest northern 
community of Camsell Portage, people in the North are praying 
for the people of Saskatchewan and of Humboldt. 
 
I pay tribute today to the many people that travel on our roads 
to attend competitions. In northern Saskatchewan, we also face 
that challenge. Bus drivers and the team personnel, coaches, 
and all the athletes that represent us and represent our 
communities are in God’s hands as they ride those buses. We 
must continue praying for all those buses and all those children 
and athletes that will continue travelling our roads. 
 
Like me, my children rode those buses from northern 
Saskatchewan and rode many great miles as friends and as 
colleagues. My grandchildren now ride those buses, and all we 
can do is hope and pray that the toughest, worst nightmares that 
happened in Humboldt will never happen again. 
 
It’s very important to note that when La Loche had their 
shooting, I couldn’t provide the strength of leadership that I saw 
from the people of Humboldt. The prayers for the victims, the 
survivors, and the family was felt by many, but the leadership 
— in particular Mayor Muench and his council, the SJHL, 
Humboldt Bronco organization, and the spiritual leaders — 
provided great strength at the vigil. My daughter and I sat and 
prayed amongst the people in St. Augustine Church, and we felt 
the compassion and strength of the community of Humboldt. 
We saw the inspiration from the fire departments and the 
RCMP, from the health care professionals, and the first 
responders with their compassion and their care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that families are suffering, but 
I can tell you from our own tragic event a number of years ago, 

prayers do indeed help. They’re so important for people to 
continue those prayers. As I mentioned, we asked for prayers 
then; we got the prayers and we got the strength. Our people, 
our northern people now pray for Humboldt and all the families 
that were devastated by this news and impacted by this 
accident. 
 
In closing, I asked an older lady one day after she lost one of 
her young sons. She lost quite a few of her siblings, as our 
family did, through accidents. We lost three. She lost four or 
five. And I asked her one day at one of the funerals of her 
children, how did she continue keeping her faith? As she sat 
there and prayed, she told me that “I leave it up to him. He will 
decide. Perhaps one day he will explain to me why this 
happens, but right now I have faith. I leave it in his hands. 
Sometimes that faith is shaken, but I leave it in his hands 
because if it is my choice I would never choose any on my 
own,” is what she said. 
 
So to the people of Humboldt, you are not alone. Let us not lose 
that faith. Let us not deny the tears. Let us not forget. And let us 
continue being Broncos forever, and being Humboldt strong. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — And on the ninth day, God looked down at his 
frozen tundra and said, “I need a skater.” So God made a 
hockey player. 
 
God said, “I need somebody who will get up before dawn, take 
15 minutes getting dressed, spend two hours on the ice, take 15 
minutes getting undressed, go home and eat breakfast, and then 
stay up past midnight skating on his frozen pond.” So God 
made a hockey player. 
 
God said, “I need somebody strong enough to tussle with the 
enemy, yet sportsman enough to shake his hand when it’s over. 
Somebody not afraid to lose, but with enough heart to despise 
not winning.” So God made a hockey player. 
 
God said, “I need somebody who can take a hard pass, 
stickhandle to the backhand, spin away from a hit, go back to 
the forehand, and wrist a shot to the net, all while gliding with 
grace and with speed on a pair of steel blades. Somebody who 
watches a shot ring off the post, only to look up at the sky and 
say with a smile, maybe next time.” So God made a hockey 
player. 
 
God needed somebody to stand in front of a rush of sticks and 
skates, take more than a hundred shots at practice, ice the 
bruises that show, rub the ones that don’t, suit back up and do it 
all over again, just so his teammates can get better. So God 
made a hockey player. 
 
God said, “I need somebody with enough desire to never quit, 
enough passion to never be good enough, and with enough grit 
to take a hard piece of frozen rubber moving 90 miles an hour 
to the cheekbone, take two minutes to catch his breath while the 
cut’s closed with stitches, slap his stick against his skates, jump 
right back on the ice, only missing one shift.” So God made a 
hockey player. 



3716 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2018 

God said, “I need an athlete, a warrior, an unselfish, 
ever-learning, hard-working, strong-willed, sharp-eyed, 
quick-witted, on-the-move thinking machine that is human 
enough to look around him, pause in the moment, and be bold 
enough and proud enough to call his team his family.” So God 
made a hockey player. 
 
We hear so many times there are no words to express how we 
truly feel. There are no words to express our condolences and 
sympathies to the family, friends, and community of our 
Humboldt Broncos. What happened Friday on a highway in our 
province was an unspeakable tragedy. The players had ridden 
that route countless times. They were all getting ready for the 
game. It was the playoffs, the pivotal game five, and they were 
ready. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The boys were going over the game plan, talking about maybe 
getting someone back from Nipawin who maybe had an 
unnoticed slash or cross-check on them the game before. 
Because that’s what happens on the bus. The boys talk. They 
get to know each other better than they know their brothers and 
sisters. And it’s where a team of players from all different 
places become a family. 
 
Over the weekend I saw a video from Ron MacLean, and his 
words stuck with me. He was standing in front of the Winkler 
Junior A team bus and he said:  
 

This bus? This bus you can’t purchase a ticket to ride on. 
The only way you get here and ride on this bus is you earn 
it. The bus is a symbol of hard work, dedication, and love. 
The hard work is the hours and hours skating, working on 
your shot, either out at outdoor rinks or at the local arena. 
When everyone else has gone home, you’re still there. 
You’re still there ringing pucks off the posts, passing the 
puck off the board to yourself, preparing for scoring that 
game seven overtime goal to win the series and maybe a 
championship. 
 
The dedication? The dedication is what you show your 
teammates when you spend time in the gym instead of 
going to watch a movie with friends or just hanging out 
with friends.  
 
The love? The love of the game. Every time you hit the 
ice, you fall in love again; the love of your parents and 
family who have laughed with you, celebrated with you in 
your achievements, and have been there for your losses. 
 

There is no love like the love of a hockey mom. Today more 
than any other day, I’m thinking about the love of hockey 
moms; they would have a lot. A lot of hockey moms and billet 
moms, moms of current players or future little stars, biological 
moms and billet moms, they all love their superstars the same, 
each and every one of them. This is from a billet mom: 
 

Last night while I was trying to sleep,  
my son’s voice I did hear, 
I opened my eyes and looked around,  
but he did not appear. 
He said, “Mom, you’ve got to listen.  

You’ve got to understand, 
God didn’t take me from you, Mom.  
He only took my hand. 
When I called out in pain that morning,  
the instant when I died, 
He reached down and took my hand  
and pulled me to his side. 
He pulled me up and saved me from the misery and pain, 
My body was hurt so badly inside  
I could never be the same. 
My search is really over now. I’ve found happiness within, 
All the answers to my empty dreams  
and all that might have been. 
I love you so and miss you so, but I’ll always be nearby, 
My body’s gone forever, but my spirit will never die. 
And so you must go on now, live one day at a time, 
Just understand, God did not take me from you.  
He only took my hand.” 
 

God bless the Humboldt Broncos. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — You know, it’s already been mentioned that 
words seem so inadequate at times like this. But in times like 
this, words are all that we have. And so I want to add a few of 
my own words to the community of Humboldt, the community 
that’s dear to my heart and my family’s, and is now dear to the 
entire world. 
 
This little city, as it does every season, embraced these young 
men and those who work with them as their own, just like so 
many other communities do in this province and in this country. 
As the Premier has already mentioned, the whole world has 
now seen the strength of Humboldt, and it’s their strength in 
community and resiliency that to me is a microcosm of 
everything that is so great about this province. 
 
And as the nation and the world turns their collective eyes and 
their hearts to the city of Humboldt and the entire east-central 
portion of this province, our thoughts and our support are with 
the entire community and will continue to be for a long time to 
come — beyond today, beyond next week, beyond next month, 
and beyond next year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As we grieve with and for the families of all who are affected, I 
wanted to take this opportunity to thank the community of 
Humboldt, the citizens of Humboldt and the surrounding area 
for being, during a time of unbearable darkness, a collective 
beam of light. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, as a parent who’s put his 
kids on many hockey buses and lots of sports buses and a coach 
of young athletes, this hits very close to home. I remember that 
spirit of invincibility that these young athletes have on those 
buses, and I hope we never lose that. I also remember the sense 
of family that that bus brings to everyone involved. 
 
I’d like to add my name to the long list of condolences to all the 



April 9, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3717 

loved ones who’ve been affected by this tragedy and to the 
community of Humboldt. But I also want to acknowledge some 
of the people in the background. And I’d like to quote Tammy 
Kirkland, our deputy minister of Government Relations, who 
sent an email out to all our staff this morning. And I quote: 
 

I want us all to recognize and be proud of the critically 
important role that many within our ministry, over the last 
few days, have played. Our emergency management and 
fire safety branch and our communications branch were 
key components of the initial response to the accident and 
continue to play a coordination role to ensure that families 
and community members receive the supports and services 
they need now and into the future. 
 
Rapid responders and emergency service officers from our 
ministry were at the accident scene. They were assisting 
RCMP. They were coordinating efforts. They were 
responding to community members. Our emergency 
operations centre was activated to ensure all government 
ministries and agencies had up-to-date information and 
were deploying support services in the most responsive 
manner possible. And our communications folks worked 
with media, dignitaries, and the community so that all 
information needs were met and others could focus on 
rescue and recovery efforts. 
 
These members of our team will not look for recognition, 
although they deserve it. But because they are colleagues 
in our midst who by virtue of their jobs and the 
commitment they bring to their roles have been very 
directly touched by this tragedy, a word of encouragement, 
a handshake, a thank you from you as colleagues will be a 
part of the safety net that we build for each other during 
this time. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like each of us to keep all of our emergency 
people in our hearts and in our prayers in all our communities 
throughout this province. It’s an unbearable task that they bear 
at the unknown minute, at any time. Mr. Speaker, our provincial 
motto probably means more than anything it ever has before: 
“from many peoples, strength.” Humboldt’s strong. In God we 
trust. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in with my 
colleagues, just to say a few words. And I guess thinking about 
the vigil last night and the pain when we heard about the news, 
so many in a blink of an eye were so impacted, so much pain 
and hurt. And then to see the families yesterday, as some have 
said, their name of their loved one being called out and 
watching how strong they were with one another. Didn’t have 
to be there to say anything, but just sitting there watching it, it 
truly was amazing, very powerful. 
 
I think about all those that have been impacted. They’re in our 
prayers and our thoughts. It’s such a tough time but we’ll be 
with them, and I know they know that, what we’re doing here 
today by honouring them — those young lives, the support. I 
just want to say to anyone that reached out to any of the family 
members that have been touched and impacted so greatly . . . 
Some of us can’t understand it. It’s not our loved one. But we 

have prayers. Our hearts are there for them. We’re there to 
support them. And I want to say thank you to anyone who has 
reached out to any of these families to give them support, 
whether it’s donations, a hug, a slap on the shoulder, the 
holding hands. Whatever it is, if it’s a small gesture, it just 
shows how strong we are as a province and as a people. 
 
I think about the young man back home and I think about, you 
know, Bryce Fiske, his mom, Tracy; I think about his dad, 
Kelly. The grandparents that you’re close to, they’re there. You 
watched him grow up. I just want to say to him — he’s in the 
hospital recovering — you’re in our thoughts and prayers, and I 
mentioned that to Tracy. And again it’s in a blink of an eye, so 
much pain and hurt he’s going to have to go through. He’ll ask 
questions and maybe he’ll ask why. Why not me? Why am I 
here?  
 
To those that are suffering and recovering, again they are in our 
prayers. It is tough. I think about his grandparents, his siblings, 
and his family members and our community, and the vigil they 
did. I just want to say on behalf of the Cumberland 
constituency, our hearts and our thoughts are with those 
families that have been so touched and impacted. I just want to 
say again from my family to those families being touched, you 
will always be in our thoughts, our prayers. You will not be 
forgotten. Humboldt Broncos, the community of Humboldt, you 
will be in our prayers. And I say, I ask the Creator to keep 
Humboldt strong. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Lumsden-Morse. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my remarks will be principally directed to those most affected 
by last Friday’s tragedy involving the Humboldt Broncos team 
bus, that is the families, loved ones, and friends of the deceased, 
the survivors of the incident, the Humboldt Broncos hockey 
organization, and the community of Humboldt and surrounding 
areas. 
 
I played a fair amount of hockey in my day, but that’s not 
important. I think what I did contribute a little more was 
coaching young people. And I remember I never . . . I guess 
when the kids were younger we took some bus trips, but a lot of 
the travel was in private vehicles. And I remember I always, 
when they were getting into those vehicles, I always felt a 
shudder of apprehension sending them out into the 
Saskatchewan winters on Saskatchewan road conditions, 
usually, sometimes both directions in the dark, and always at 
least one. But we were . . . Like most rural Saskatchewan 
hockey travel, we didn’t ever have any major incidents, and we 
were so fortunate. 
 
As one of the older members in this honourable Assembly, I 
have naturally experienced the loss of family and close friends, 
and I don’t think I’m very good at it or likely ever will be. But I 
know that when tragedy strikes in this province, we become like 
a giant small town and we all grieve. To those of you closest to 
the victims, please know that the whole province and far 
beyond is grieving for you and your loss, and I hope you can 
take strength from that.  
 
I’m so proud of the professional players and former players and 



3718 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2018 

coaches, even the president of the NHL [National Hockey 
League], who have voluntarily poured out their hearts to 
support you. We’ve seen NHL players with Broncos proudly 
displayed on the back of their jerseys where their own names 
would normally go. The hockey fraternity across North 
America understands and they are there for you, and I hope you 
can take strength from that. 
 
Outside of hockey we’ve seen the Saskatchewan Rush and 
various professional baseball players sharing their support for 
you, and I hope you can take strength from that. The Queen and 
the Pope have offered heartfelt condolences, and I hope that you 
can take strength from that.  
 
And what I’ve learned about grieving is that everybody does it 
differently and at a different pace. We all need to be 
understanding of the grieving process for those closest to the 
tragedy and to always be willing to talk or hold a hand or just 
be there for company when that’s what’s needed. Grieving is 
not a time-limited process. Our support needs to be ongoing. 
 
[14:45] 
 
I think the Broncos chaplain said it well last night in Humboldt 
when he said words to the effect that the wounds will eventually 
heal but the scars will remain. There are times that will always 
be more difficult for families, loved ones, and friends, including 
the survivors, like birthdays and special occasions. 
 
I know that Saskatchewan people will always be there for you, 
any time that you signal that you need them. Please reach out to 
them when you feel that you need to, as you will in the weeks, 
months, and years to come. 
 
It’s rare that we are ever in total agreement in this great room 
where I stand and make these insignificant and inadequate and 
meagre remarks today, but today we truly are united in our 
thoughts and prayers for you, and I hope that you can take some 
strength from that. 
 
I’m sure that everyone in this province who has ever prayed has 
said a prayer for you and for those close to you that were in that 
bus. God bless you and those who we all lost on Friday. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m both 
honoured and saddened to offer my comments to the 
condolence motion for the town of Humboldt and the Broncos 
and the families today. 
 
Saskatchewan is hockey, Mr. Speaker, and we’re all impacted. 
And why is that? It’s because hockey isn’t just a sport. It’s 
about relationships. That’s why it hits so hard. 
 
I come from a hockey family. I was pretty much done by my 
midget days; I wasn’t much of a hockey player. But my parents 
were very involved with the Weyburn Red Wings and the 
Yorkton Terriers, and my brother played junior and semi-pro 
hockey. My sons-in-law both have played junior hockey and 
competitive hockey. My one nephew that’s currently starting 
his pro career is a good friend of a number of the Broncos, so it 
does hit very close to home. 

Thursday we were joyfully celebrating the birth of a new 
grandson at home, and that spilled over into Friday until the 
news came later on Friday — a sobering reminder of how 
quickly life can change. The loss of any family or community 
member is devastating. We all know that. The loss of a young 
person can be even more so. It’s difficult to imagine anything 
worse than the loss of a child. It’s the wrong order of life 
events. Many parents lost children last week, Mr. Speaker. 
Some in this Assembly know that pain all too well. 
 
As difficult as it is, I’m here to tell you that there is hope. As 
dark as life seems right now, over time if you allow yourself to 
heal, if you call on God and allow him to help you heal, the bad 
thoughts and memories subside and the good thoughts and 
memories slowly do overcome those. You will see morning 
light and feel joy again. But to see the morning, unfortunately, 
first we have to mourn, grieve. As painful as it is to grieve, we 
can’t go under, above, around any of it. We must go through it. 
 
But you don’t need to do it alone. Many are there for you. The 
Lord is there for you. Part of healing is hurt and tears. I’ve read 
studies about grief and the tears associated, and scientifically 
tears of physical pain are different than the tears of joy, and 
both are very different than the tears of grief. Those tears 
cleanse the body of nasty stuff, Mr. Speaker, physically and 
emotionally, so it’s healing to cry. So allow yourselves to cry. 
 
Part of healing is forgiveness. We’re going to have to learn to 
forgive. It’s been said that life doesn’t give you more than you 
can handle — but there’s more to that statement, Mr. Speaker 
— with God. Life can’t give you more than you can handle with 
him. Even if some who hear this don’t believe, trust, and rely on 
him, I challenge you: I ask you to give it a shot. Talk to him. 
Ask him for help. Be angry and yell. It’s okay. He’s got big 
shoulders. He can take it. 
 
People ask where God was in all this, and many have stated — 
the Broncos chaplain did an outstanding job last night — no one 
can answer that with total confidence. But I don’t believe God 
causes these tragedies, Mr. Speaker, but I do know something 
with total confidence, that he can use all things for good. When 
you hear of some miraculous survival, when you hear of stories 
of people around the world sending their thoughts, prayers, and 
support, when you hear the stories of people being saved by an 
organ donation, when you hear of the unity of people behind 
those affected, when you hear of the stories of people searching 
for answers through faith, I know God’s already at work. I pray 
that all are blessed by God’s healing peace and comfort that 
surpasses all understanding. Our condolences to the families 
and all affected by this terrible tragedy, and as has been stated, 
including emergency response people, medical and mental 
health personnel, the clergy — remember, you’re not alone. 
 
My wife and I adopted this as our life scripture after the loss of 
our own son: 2 Corinthians 3 through 7 says God comforts us in 
our troubles so we can comfort others in their time of need, Mr. 
Speaker. Let us continue to comfort one another in the days, 
weeks, months, and years ahead. And I pray the Lord bless you 
and keep you, that his face shine upon you and be gracious to 
you; the Lord lift up his countenance on you, and give you 
peace. In the name of our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ. 
Amen. 
 



April 9, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3719 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
try and be very brief. I’m sure there are 61 people in this room 
that could tell a story that relates to this terrible tragedy. I really 
wrestled whether I should stand and say anything at all, but I 
really felt I had to. Like so many people in Saskatchewan, this 
hits close to home although I didn’t know any of the players 
directly. Having played in the SJHL and ridden the bus, having 
just about given your left toe to be able to get on that bus, it 
was, you know . . . And then you’d have to make the road trip 
to Prince Albert when the Raiders were in the SJHL and get 
kicked up there, and still be glad to get on that bus. Mr. 
Speaker, I had to stand and say a little bit about that, as well as 
a parent, and how difficult that must be for those parents. 
 
Before I get into the bus trip a little bit and the parents, I do 
want to say thank you to all the health care professionals. It’s 
been mentioned many times, but they’re an amazing, an 
amazing group. I know one of the fellows that . . . He’s a nurse 
that was flying on STARS that Friday afternoon, and the 
missions they made back and forth from the intersection of 35, 
Highway 335 to Saskatoon, back and forth with the victims, 
timing out and not getting home that night, spending the night 
in Saskatoon, getting home the next day and getting a call that 
next day on the way home to pick up another, to do another 
emergency case on the way from Moose Jaw — that’s the type 
of people that we have in the caregiving industry. Again from 
my family’s perspective, if it wasn’t for the air trauma team, we 
would be in a different situation. So to all of those, thank you 
very much. 
 
It’s an amazing province, you know. We’ve got five WHL 
[Western Hockey League] teams. We’ve got 12 SJHL teams 
that travel millions of miles every winter. And that’s just the 
WHL and the SJHL. You think of all the midget teams — and 
that’s just hockey — and then you extrapolate that over all the 
other sports, and the exposure to what happened on Friday is so 
great, it is a miracle that we are only talking about this one 
tragedy. 
 
And I know there was one a number of years ago in Swift 
Current. But the exposure of all of those athletes following their 
dream and following their passion, I don’t think there would be 
anybody that is getting on those buses, that is taking teams, 
whether it’s coaches or whatever, would ever give that up for 
the risk that they’re taking because the passion that they’re 
pursuing far outweighs any risk that they may be facing. 
 
And so, you know, as we move forward, this tragedy has rocked 
the province; it’s rocked the nation; it’s rocked all of us. 
Moving forward, you know, I just hope that that passion is 
never stopped or interfered with with something like this. In 
fact I hope it makes those passions and the pursuit of those 
passions even greater. 
 
I would quickly say too, to all that have reached out to the 
parents, you know, the parents of the 15 people that passed and 
the 14 that are still surviving, for all those that have reached 
out, I can tell you from experience, a year ago getting that 
phone call, how important that support is. So if you haven’t 
reached out, please do. If you haven’t got involved, somehow 

get involved because it makes a world of difference. 
 
You know, the human body is an amazing thing. It can go 
through a lot and it can survive. But what’s even more amazing 
is the human spirit, and we’ve seen that being displayed here in 
Saskatchewan, across Canada, and around the world right now. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It has been said 
over and over in the past few days and again here today that 
there are no words to capture the sorrow and grief that the 
people of our province and beyond its borders are feeling and 
want to convey. Yet words are what we have in this place, this 
Assembly, so we will try our best to use our words, however 
inadequate. 
 
I have not lost a child. What I can do is draw upon the loss of 
my sister at the age of 29. We are often reluctant to reach out to 
those in grief because we are afraid that we might say or do the 
wrong thing. Let me assure you that there is nothing to fear. I 
remember my in-laws driving to Regina to support me at my 
sister’s funeral. I remember every single colleague from CTV 
[Canadian Television Network Ltd.] who attended her 
memorial service in Saskatoon. I might not recall their words 
but I do recall their presence. 
 
There was a post shared on social media this past weekend. It 
comes from an article written by Megan Devine titled “How To 
Help a Grieving Friend,” and it was published on the Huffington 
Post website. Megan offers advice as a counsellor and a grief 
advocate. 
 

Above all, show your love. Show up. Say something. Do 
something. Be willing to stand beside the gaping hole that 
has opened in your friend’s life, without flinching or 
turning away. Be willing to not have any answers. Listen. 
Be there. Be present. Be a friend. Be love. Love is the 
thing that lasts. 

 
I borrowed the words that were posted on social media by Brent 
Toombs from Belize, and I quote: 
 

“Thoughts and prayers” has taken a beating lately. What 
used to be a well intentioned expression of support has 
been co-opted by people who believe an empty tweet with 
that phrase somehow absolves them from any and all 
responsibility to stop students from getting shot or from 
providing aid to brown people devastated by natural 
disasters. “Sending thoughts and prayers” and nothing else. 
 
When the news broke of the horrific tragedy involving the 
Humboldt Broncos, social media blew up with “thoughts 
and prayers.” 
 
Thoughts and prayers. And hundreds of people gathering at 
the local hockey arena in the middle of a bitterly cold 
Saskatchewan night in order to support members of their 
community. 
 
Thoughts and prayers. And coffee, donuts, and food that 



3720 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2018 

always seem to magically appear whenever a group of 
people in Saskatchewan gather, especially in difficult 
times. 
 
Thoughts and prayers. And people offering up their homes 
to anyone who needs a place to stay. And hotels offering 
free rooms. 
 
Thoughts and prayers. And people waiting in line for 3 
hours to donate blood in Saskatoon. 
 
Thoughts and prayers. And grief counsellors dispatched to 
assist the families, first responders, or anyone who needs 
someone to talk with. 
 
Thoughts and prayers. And Canada’s two major airlines 
reaching out to assist affected families who need to travel 
to Saskatchewan. 
 
Thoughts and prayers. And a line-up of people 
volunteering to get bumped off their flight so a family can 
get to Saskatoon sooner. 
 
Thoughts and prayers. And parents who just lost their son 
in the accident keeping him on life support long enough so 
his organs can be used to help 6 other people. 
 
Thoughts and prayers. And NHL coaches in tears speaking 
about kids they never met. And NHL teams honouring the 
Humboldt Broncos with on ice ceremonies and cash 
donations. 
 
Thoughts and prayers. And a nation watching Hockey 
Night in Canada with tears in their eyes. 
 
Thoughts and prayers. And over $3.3 MILLION dollars 
(and counting) donated by 49,000 people in just 36 hours 
to assist the people affected by this unimaginable tragedy. 

 
Thanks to the outpouring of support in the actions of so 
many, “thoughts and prayers” has value again. In Canada, 
especially in Saskatchewan, “thoughts and prayers” 
obviously never stopped meaning something much, much 
deeper. 

 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is often described as a relatively 
small tight-knit community, and that’s why this tragedy hurts us 
and affects us all. It is because we are that tight-knit community 
that an amazing response has been witnessed, and we are 
blessed for that strong sense of community. I am so proud of 
this province that we call home. May our thoughts and prayers 
continue as long as they are needed. 
 
There have been many thanks expressed to all those who 
responded and assisted in so many ways. I want to add my 
gratitude and that of my family, and the constituents of 
Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood who I represent in this place. I 
would also like to thank my Premier for his leadership and his 
strength during this very difficult time. 
 
I want to read a message of condolence from His Holiness Pope 

Francis to my bishop, His Excellency Mark Hagemoen of the 
Saskatoon diocese that includes the Humboldt community: 
 

“Informed of the injury and tragic loss of life caused by the 
road traffic accident in the province of Saskatchewan 
involving young hockey players, His Holiness Pope 
Francis sends his condolences to those who have lost loved 
ones, and commends the souls of the deceased to the mercy 
of almighty God. To all in the community at this difficult 
time, Pope Francis sends his blessing.” 

 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to share a prayer in my 
Catholic tradition for the dear, young men who lost their lives. 
“Eternal rest grant upon them, O Lord, and let perpetual light 
shine upon them. May they rest in peace. Amen.” 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 
Hon. Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly with a heavy heart that I rise this afternoon to support 
the Premier’s motion, the condolence motion this afternoon. 
 
I think the Leader of the Opposition mentioned that there’s just 
a few degrees of separation here in our great province of 
Saskatchewan and an event, a horrible event like this certainly 
reverberates. You hear over the weekend, you follow the news 
reports, and you know, you watch in horror the folks that were 
affected, the ones that lost their lives. And you know, you think 
of being in that situation of course, but you think about the 
coaches that had guided those folks. 
 
As a coach myself, you know, I always refer to the players I’ve 
coached as, those are my guys. Those are my guys. Wherever 
they go, as time goes on, as they move on, if they get a 
scholarship or maybe they get in trouble or whatever happens, 
you know, those are my guys. And I can’t help but think that 
that’s the situation that happened with the Humboldt Broncos. 
 
I know a former teammate of mine, Kelly Bates, he had a 
football camp up there. He was so proud of being from 
Humboldt and he gathered coaches from around the CFL 
[Canadian Football League] to come and join that. And one of 
the folks that spent so much time, because he cared about his 
community, was Tyler Bieber. He was always out there helping 
out. He lost his life on Friday. 
 
I also think of another coach, Mark Cross. He was an assistant 
coach. And of course, Coach Haugan. I saw a clip on the news 
of one of his former players that was just so overcome with 
emotion and how that affected him. 
 
But just briefly back to Mark, he was one of our guys — all the 
players, all the coaches were — he was one of our guys in 
Parks, Mr. Speaker. He spent the summers, the last nine years 
working at Regina Beach from the Rowan’s Ravine crew during 
the summers to help pay for . . . He went to the university of 
York and he was giving back to his community. His cousin said 
here: 
 

I can honestly say I didn’t know a more kind-hearted, 
generous, caring, and overall nice person. Mark was one of 
those people that just made you feel safe and brought a 



April 9, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3721 

special spark when you were in his presence. 
 
I always say if you want to help your community, you want to 
make an impact in your community, give back by coaching. 
Use your talents to give back that way. It’s certainly a powerful 
thing when a player or somebody that you’ve mentored gets it 
and they excel and they can feel good about themselves. All 
teachers know that feeling. Coaches know that feeling when 
you’re able to bridge that gap, help someone get where they 
need to be, not only on the ice or the field or whatever 
technically, but in their lives as they go on. 
 
So they’re mentors. They pass on their passion for the game. I 
think those coaches certainly did that with their players. And I 
think when you learn those things, players, if they don’t get to 
go on, many of them become coaches themselves and they 
move on and they become mentors. And the cycle just 
perpetuates itself. So I think those folks that lost their lives on 
Friday, their teaching, their passion, that will live on with others 
as they’ve been touched by their example. 
 
I didn’t know any of those coaches. I didn’t know any of those 
kids. But from my time as a teacher, as a coach, I think I do 
know them. I think I do know them. Not individually of course, 
but I know they’re just great people. I know they’re good 
people. They’re chasing a dream. They’re away from home, 
being away from their families for months on end just to chase 
that. I think there’s something very noble and very special about 
that. I think they know it’s a privilege. It’s a privilege to play at 
that level. You know it’s a privilege. Very few get that 
opportunity. They found structure. They found accountability. 
They found competition. 
 
I remember late in my career the hockey season and football 
season would kind of overlap in the spring there a little bit 
when you’re doing your off-season workouts and you’d cross 
paths a little bit with those kids. At that time I was an old man. 
But they’re just great people. They’re just high energy. They’re 
funny. They are respectful. Boy, those kids were awesome. I 
kept saying, boy, if I was younger I’d definitely be hanging out 
with those guys if they’d let me. 
 
You know, they knew what it was like for somebody to ask for 
their autograph, ask for a selfie, to have people put their cash 
down — their hard-earned cash — to come watch them play, to 
cheer them on. And it meant a lot to them. It meant a lot to 
them, I’m sure of it. I’m sure they have that young feeling of 
just, here I am, I’m doing exactly what I want to do with my 
life. There’s no place I’d rather be. And that’s a great time of 
life. 
 
I don’t know their parents, but I know they’re so proud. They’re 
so proud of their players. I’m sure there was some parents that 
would, you know, bore their co-workers to death about how 
great their kids are doing. We made the playoffs. My kid scored 
a goal. And there’s others that are very stoic about it and just 
that quiet pride of having one of your kids sacrifice so much, 
work so hard, put it all on the line just for a dream. And they’re 
so proud of that, that they had that goal, they had that drive and 
that determination. 
 
I’ve been on a few bus trips myself. You know I think it’s as 
much a part of the game and it’s been said before that, you 

know, it’s just like another locker room. It’s the same as putting 
on your helmet or lacing up your skates or a slapshot or 
watching film, whatever. Being on the bus, that’s certainly a 
special time. 
 
You know I don’t know it, but I think probably on the Broncos 
team, the coaches were right at the front, the veterans are at the 
back, guys in the middle probably were really into studying so 
they wanted to read their book and they were . . . At the back, 
they were probably playing cards, having a good time, watching 
movies. I’m sure they watched movies to pass time. 
 
Now technology, I’m sure, has changed over the years. They 
can do the iPad and the peer-to-peer and all that. But there was 
probably superstitious seating arrangements. If a guy was on a 
streak, he’s definitely sitting in that same spot. And they might 
move around if things weren’t going well for the team. I’m sure 
there are some bathroom rules. If it was a shorter bus trip, there 
might be ways around that. 
 
So those are, you know . . . I’m sure for all the folks that have 
been on bus trips before . . . I know though, that team was 
together. They did the old playoff tradition. Some teams get 
tattoos, I’ve heard. Some dye their hair. Some shave their hair. 
Some grow beards, etc. So this was a team, this was a team. 
And again I say, no place I think they’d rather be. They were 
enjoying life, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s what makes this 
situation so very hard, so very hard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll wrap it up here. These are very tough times. 
These are tough times for everyone involved, for the whole 
province, obviously Humboldt, and all the folks involved with 
the team. My heart goes out to them. And, Mr. Speaker, I know 
in Saskatchewan and in Humboldt, these are the toughest folks 
you’re going to find, as tough as you’re going to find. And you 
know, they’re going to get through it. They’re not going to get 
over it, but they’re going to get through it. These are our guys, 
Mr. Speaker. Memory eternal. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Hindley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know I left 
Swift Current this morning, and as I’ve done so many times, 
hundreds of times, just east of the city I passed the site of the 
1986 Swift Current Broncos bus crash. And I’ve thought about 
that spot often, but never as much as I have this past weekend. 
 
Thirty years ago, 30-plus years ago, Trent Kresse, Scott Kruger, 
Chris Mantyka, and Brent Ruff perished that day in late 
December 1986. The Swift Current Broncos and every minor 
hockey team in Swift Current now wears a four-leaf clover 
patch on their jersey that has the numbers of the jersey numbers 
of those players who passed that day to remember them forever. 
 
I was asked on the weekend why it is that, why this tragedy in 
Humboldt has touched so many lives. And you know, it’s not 
just the magnitude of the accident, but I think it’s the nature of 
it, the fact that hockey is part of the fabric of our communities, 
of our province, and of our nation. I’m sure just about every one 
of us can either relate in some way or another. We’ve either 
played hockey or had a brother or a sister or a relative who has 
played hockey or who has coached or who has volunteered. 
 



3722 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2018 

And as we talked about earlier today, the bus trips. So many of 
us have either been a hockey player who has ridden on one of 
those buses, or we run a fan bus, or perhaps you’re a part of a 
basketball team or a band concert or a school trip. So many of 
us have ridden on a bus just like that on a cold Saskatchewan 
day down one of those long stretches of highway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I didn’t grow up in Swift Current. I wasn’t there in 
1986 when the crash happened. I was born and raised in 
northeast Saskatchewan near Melfort, and my mom and dad had 
season tickets to the Melfort Mustangs of the SJHL. We’d go 
and watch them play teams like the Humboldt Broncos and the 
Nipawin Hawks and all the other teams in the league. 
 
And I remember going to high school and going to class with 
some of the players on those teams. And, Mr. Speaker, on the 
weekends, on Friday and Saturday nights, they were our 
hometown heroes. They are our warriors on the ice. But the rest 
of the time, they were just kids in high school trying to pass 
algebra 30 like I was. They were involved in the community. 
They were living with a billet family. So you got to know those 
players and they became family. 
 
When I moved to Swift Current in spring of 1996, the bus crash 
was one of the things that I knew about. Everybody knew about 
it and talks about it in Swift Current. And I moved to Swift 
Current actually to take a radio job, and my dream when I was a 
kid was to be a hockey play-by-play announcer. And I started 
off as a news announcer for a radio station, but in my second 
year there I got a chance to live out that dream and I was asked 
to be the colour commentator for the Swift Current Broncos for 
three seasons. 
 
And that’s when I had an opportunity to ride the team bus and 
sit at the front of the bus with my play-by-play guy, Regan 
Bartel; the coach at the time, Todd McLellan was the head 
coach of the Swift Current Broncos. And some of the other 
members talked about today, you know, the hierarchy of the 
bus. The rookies were usually near the front, the veterans near 
the back. And I think of how much things have changed, but 
how much things have stayed the same. Just kids on a bus, a 
locker room on wheels going to play a sport that they loved. 
Listening to music. Playing cards. Watching movies. 
 
At the crash site at Humboldt on the weekend they found a 
shattered DVD [digital versatile disc] of the movie Slap Shot 
and you think of how many hockey players have watched that 
movie, and they still do today despite how old that movie is. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to be standing here today. None of us 
do. I never want to do this again. But I can think of 15 people 
who would trade anything in the world to be here today, to go 
to work one more time, to go to school, to hug a loved one, to 
lace up the skates one more time. 
 
Adam Herold, Jaxon Joseph, Jacob Leicht. The three Logans — 
Logan Boulet, Logan Hunter, Logan Schatz. Conner Lukan, 
Evan Thomas, Parker Tobin, Stephen Wack. They’re just boys, 
Mr. Speaker, just boys. Broadcaster Tyler Bieber, chasing his 
dream. Volunteer statistician — he was a volunteer — Brody 
Hinz. Bus driver Glen Doerksen, who drove thousands of trips, 

was entrusted with the safety of these young players and had 
done it faithfully so many times. And the coaches, assistant 
coach Mark Cross and head coach Darcy Haugan, tasked with 
more than just teaching players how to play hockey, but 
teaching them how to become young men and young adults. 
 
Pastor Sean Brandow at the vigil last night spoke about scars. 
He said, “A scar is something that is healed, but still there.” 
This isn’t going to go away. It’s not going to be as raw. Can we 
heal? Yes. Will the scar be there? Yes. 
 
The scars are still there in Swift Current. They’ll always be 
there, but we’ll always remember those four players from that 
day, December of 1986. The people of Humboldt, the friends, 
families, and loved ones of those lost will always remember 
those people. The wound will go away, but there will always be 
a scar. 
 
On behalf of the city of Swift Current and surrounding area and 
from one Broncos organization to another, our thoughts and 
prayers are with you. May God give you strength. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I find it very difficult to 
speak at this time and I know all of my colleagues have felt the 
same way. However I would really like to just say a few words 
from both myself and from my colleague from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford on behalf of our Battlefords North Stars and 
indeed the whole of Battlefords and the northwest of the 
province. 
 
Firstly I would like to also lend my voice to say thank you to all 
of the first responders, the emergency people that showed up, 
the police — everybody who has done such a great job to try to 
lessen the pain of this tragedy, a tragedy like this which is just 
absolutely unfathomable. It has struck the hearts of everyone 
who is aware of it, not only from the hockey community but 
from every person in Saskatchewan, in Canada, and indeed 
around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the North Stars have played in the SJHL since the 
early ’70s. And of course their players since that time have 
travelled thousands of miles in buses to arenas around this 
province including to Humboldt, as have many other teams, Mr. 
Speaker, at every level and of other sports, as has been 
mentioned here already. 
 
Shandon Reichert, president of the North Stars sends this 
message, and I quote: 
 

We are devastated by this tragedy that occurred. Please 
know that you are in our hearts, our thoughts, and our 
prayers. We will support you in any way that we can. May 
God bless the entire Humboldt Bronco organization and 
their families. We are all Humboldt Broncos today. 

 
And Steven Nelson the vice-president and a former player with 
the North Stars wanted me to share this message, and he said: 
 

I offer my condolences to the entire Humboldt Broncos 
organization and all those affected by this tragedy. Our 
hockey family is grieving right now and our hearts go out 



April 9, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3723 

to you. We hope that in this time, the memories and the 
support will help you heal the scars and make everyone 
stronger. Today, tomorrow, and always Humboldt will be 
in our hearts. We are all Humboldt strong. 

 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of everyone in The Battlefords and in 
the constituency of Cut Knife-Turtleford and all of our 
northwest of our province, I extend our sincere condolences to 
all of the families and the billet families and all those who are 
close to this tragedy and have been affected. Our thoughts and 
prayers go out to all of you as you face the daunting task of 
coping and healing and remembering the beautiful souls that 
you have lost. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I just wanted to add a couple of comments with 
respect to the motion that has been put forward by the member, 
from the Premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a couple of things that have struck me over the 
last couple of days in watching the coverage of such a, as 
everybody has said, an unspeakable tragedy, and in part, the 
national coverage of this terrible accident, describing Humboldt 
as the city of Humboldt. And what was striking me about that is 
wondering if the people of Canada or the people outside of this 
country that were watching this coverage, could really put into 
context what this really means. 
 
Humboldt is a city, in what we call a city in this province, but 
Humboldt is a small town, Mr. Speaker. About 6,000 people 
live in Humboldt. And for those of us that have grown up in or 
around communities where there’s an SJHL team, I don’t think 
people really understand what that team means to that 
community. These are young . . . They’re boys, Mr. Speaker. 
They’ve come from around the province, from outside of the 
province. Some may be from that home community, but really 
these are boys that are learning about hockey and improving 
their craft. 
 
But they’re really learning about life at such a tender age. Life 
is but a vapour, and these boys come from all over western 
Canada to these 12 communities across our province, in the 
case of the SJHL, and they’re really learning about life. And 
they give so much in a short amount of time to their 
communities. 
 
I remember the Weyburn Red Wings were my team and, you 
know, guys like Gary Gaudet to a seven- or an eight-year-old, 
what somebody like that meant to our community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So these young, young men, these boys, they go into the 
classrooms. The young students get to know who these players 
are, and for how much joy that playing hockey brings to them. I 
sometimes don’t know at that age if they really understand how 
much joy that they bring to these communities. You have young 
kids all the way up to seniors who, on a Friday night or a 
Tuesday night, this is the thing to do, is to go watch the Broncos 
— in this case the Broncos — play hockey, Mr. Speaker. So I 
really hope that that comes across, that while this is the city of 
Humboldt, it’s a small town and this is their team, Mr. Speaker. 

You know, Mr. Speaker, so I was thinking about that over the 
last couple of days and thinking about the families, the billet 
families who take these kids in — they really just immediately 
become a part of their family — and the families that are back 
home, wherever that home may be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In grade 12 I worked for the local radio station and my job was 
. . . I was the operator of the hockey games. And so that meant 
that when we went to a commercial break, I needed to be there 
to turn the commercial on and make sure I turned the mikes 
down for the guys that were announcing the game. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, to show the extent of the families back home 
that were thinking about and following their kids that were in a 
different town playing hockey, I’ll never forget the fact that 
Mark Hartigan’s mother would phone me every night at the 
radio station that the Red Wings were playing, whether the 
game was in Weyburn or whether they were on the road. She 
would phone me from Fort St. John, British Columbia to be put 
on hold, so that for those two and a half hours while she was on 
hold, she could listen to the hockey game. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my heart breaks for those parents that are 
sitting at the bedsides of the hospital bed of their kid that is 
fighting for their life. And I weep for those parents that will 
never see their kids come back home, that will never return 
from the season. Mr. Speaker, I offer my condolences to not 
just the co-workers of Tyler Bieber and the young statistician 
that worked for the radio station, but everybody in the Golden 
West radio family who were watching these two young guys 
develop their career, and in fact across the sports media in the 
province. It’s a small community, and I know that they’re all 
hurting right now. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I just offer my sympathies to 
everybody in Humboldt and the hockey community. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Goudy: — Mr. Speaker, on Friday night I was on the 
phone with the staff sergeant of our detachment. And I’m the 
chaplain for our area and so I was sent out to spend time with 
the RCMP and watched them have to inform the families where 
their children were at, whether they were alive or not. And it 
was tough for them that night, standing with them out in the 
cold. 
 
And you know, I was racing on the way out there with a few 
other guys and we all sat quiet in the truck. And it never crossed 
my mind to think, you know, I should phone the Premier; he 
might be able to help. As nice of a guy as our Education 
minister, Highways minister, nobody came to mind. Who do 
you call? Who do you phone? And so as we were driving out, 
everything was quiet. 
 
You know, we’ve been saying that our thoughts and our prayers 
are with the families and the friends, and so why don’t we just 
bow our heads together? You know, this is a beautiful House, 
but nobody can just barge in and come and ask our Premier for 
a favour. But you know, God tells us that in times of need, he 
says we can come boldly before the throne of grace to find 
grace for that time of need. And none of us here, no matter who 
we are, what position we hold, can mend a heart, but he can. So 



3724 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2018 

let’s bow our heads together just for a few minutes, and just 
pray for the families. 
 
Father in heaven, you said to fulfill the royal law that we should 
bear one another’s burdens. But Lord, these burdens are too 
heavy for any of us to carry. And so, Lord, we come before 
your throne in heaven boldly, to ask in this time for the need of 
these mothers and these fathers, these brothers and these sisters, 
who’ve lost . . . Lord, I just pray that you would give them the 
strength to face all their tomorrows, that, Lord, as they go to 
bed at night, they could rest. And as they wake up in the 
morning, you can give them strength to face the day and to 
know that, as Sean had said, those wounds will turn to scars. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Lord, give them hope, we pray. Give them strength. I think of 
your words, of your son when he was dying on the cross and he 
said to his best friend, Son, behold your mother. He looked at 
his mom and he said, look after my mom. And he said to his 
mom, Mother, behold your son, and he pointed to John. 
 
And, Lord, we’ve got each other. And for everyone here and for 
everyone in this province, I pray that we would really lean on 
each other and fulfill that royal law: bear each other’s burdens; 
care for one another; uphold each other. 
 
So, Father, in the midst of all this devastation and grief, bring 
peace. We pray in Jesus’ name. Amen. 
 
The Speaker: — These have been tragic days for Humboldt 
and this province. I’d like to thank all of the members for their 
words. I hope they’ve been of some comfort. I’ve been on that 
bus, and we are all Humboldt strong. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Why is the Government House 
Leader on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I would ask leave to move a motion of 
transmittal. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 
leave. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 

TRANSMITTAL MOTION 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. 
 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit copies of the motion as well as the verbatim 
transcripts of the debate to the families of those lost, the 
Humboldt Broncos junior hockey club, and the city of 
Humboldt. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved: 
 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit copies of the motion as well as verbatim 
transcripts of the debate to the families of those lost, the 
Humboldt Broncos junior hockey club, and the city of 
Humboldt. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that this House be now adjourned. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:33.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

CONDOLENCE MOTION 
 Humboldt Broncos Bus Tragedy 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3709 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3711 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3712 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3713 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3713 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 3713 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 3714 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3715 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3715 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3716 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3716 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3717 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3717 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 3718 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3719 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3719 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 3720 
  Hindley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3721 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3722 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3723 
  Goudy ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3723 
TRANSMITTAL MOTION 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3724 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


