


















































April 18, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 44A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 18, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3917 
 April 18, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to all members of this honourable 
Assembly, I’d like to introduce a school group of 13 grade 5 
students from Herbert School. The students are accompanied 
today by their teacher, Pat Jahnke; educational assistant, 
Donovan Epp; and the school principal, Arron Kohlman. I’d ask 
all members to give them a warm welcome to their Legislative 
Assembly, and I look forward to meeting with them a little 
later. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my absolute honour 
this afternoon to rise and to introduce a school group seated in 
the east gallery, Mr. Speaker. With us today we have eight 
grade 6 to 8 students who attend Prairie Sky School, not too far 
from here. I suspect you walked over today, did you? 
 
This is a great group of kids. They attend a unique school in 
Regina Lakeview just off Hill Avenue and spend a lot of time in 
the community and doing work for the community, Mr. 
Speaker. Joining them today or with them today is their teacher, 
Mr. Dave Vanderberg. And I invite all members to welcome 
these students to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It brings me great pleasure to introduce my friend 
Jodie Hetherington who’s seated up in the far gallery. If you 
could give a wave. Jodie is well known to many of us on this 
side of the House. She and her husband, Mark, are big farmers 
in the Minister of Agriculture’s constituency. 
 
You know, my husband and I were very close friends with her 
late father-in-law, Doug Hetherington. She’s a registered nurse 
and mother of three: Lukas, Alyssa, and Jacob. They are big 
boosters of the community in so many ways, Mr. Speaker, 
perhaps most notably, their involvement with the Moose Jaw 
Warriors, where they not only support the organization but they 
also billet many of the players and mentor them through. In this 
last two weeks it’s been particularly important, to recognize 
your work there. They’re also very active at Lindale School and 
very, very strong philanthropists. I want to welcome you to 
your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize again the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to also 
recognize Jodie Hetherington. Jodie is a very bright young 
woman in the agriculture community and the community 

surrounding Moose Jaw, and also a very valuable addition to 
my constituency executive. And I’d like to welcome her here. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, through you to 
all the members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce one 
of my friends, neighbours, and constituents. Shahid Pervaiz is 
here to watch question period. I ask all the members to join me 
and welcome him in his legislature. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Goudy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer. 
 
The Speaker: — I need the member to be in his correct seat. 
Okay, we’re moving. I recognize the member for — stand up — 
I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Goudy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Porcupine 
Plain, and I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Father and Son Recognized at Track and Field 
Championship 

 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past February, 
a number of University of Saskatchewan Huskie athletes 
participated in the Canada West track and field championships 
held at the University of Manitoba in Winnipeg. One of those 
was proud Métis athlete Kieran Johnston. Kieran is a gifted 
athlete, winning the 2015 Huskie Track Rookie of the Year. 
During the Winnipeg competition, Kieran was the lone gold 
medallist for the Huskies, earning gold in the men’s heptathlon 
and the silver in the 60-metre hurdles race. 
 
Kieran is an incredibly well-rounded young man. Even with all 
the hours of training involved with track, he still finds time for 
his other interests like acting. For instance, this past fall he had 
a major role playing the initially shy Brad in the University of 
Saskatchewan production of Rocky Horror Picture Show. 



3918 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2018 

Kieran’s father, Todd Johnston, was also there at the Canada 
West track and field championships in his role as the assistant 
coach for the Huskies women’s team. Todd — who originally 
hails from my constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale, and his 
mother still calls it home — is no slouch himself and won the 
Assistant Coach of the Year at the Canada West track and field 
awards banquet. 
 
In March, Kieran also went on to win gold in the heptathlon at 
the U Sports national championship where he scored 5,259 
points, 208 points ahead of the silver medallist, by finishing 
first in all but two of the seven events. And this month Kieran 
was also named the University of Saskatchewan Male Athlete 
of the Year. Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me 
in congratulating Kieran and his dad, Todd, on their 
well-deserved honours. 
 
The Speaker: — Does anybody have a statement? I recognize 
the member for Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Former Premier Inducted Into Hall of Fame 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night myself, 
along with the Premier and many members of this Assembly, 
had the pleasure of attending the Junior Achievement of 
Saskatchewan Hall of Fame inductee ceremony. The most 
recent inductee was someone members of both sides of this 
House know well: our former premier, Brad Wall. He’s our 
province’s first and only premier to be inducted into the hall of 
fame. 
 
Brad was being inducted thanks to his work in helping 
businesses thrive throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 
From clearing red tape to slashing business tax rates, Brad made 
it a priority to provide a competitive environment for 
Saskatchewan businesses to thrive. And, Mr. Speaker, 
competitive business environments help our communities. The 
second-fastest economic growth in Canada over the past 10 
years has allowed us to invest in health care, education, and 
social services.  
 
But, Mr. Speaker, Brad would be the first person to say 
government doesn’t deserve all the credit. Organizations such 
as Junior Achievement are just as, if not more, important as JA 
[Junior Achievement] impacts Saskatchewan students’ lives 
through their training, materials, and mentorship, teaching 
students the value of free enterprise and developing their 
leadership skills and entrepreneur skills. We’ve heard some of 
the impact last night in speeches from current and former JA 
members, and can see it through the impressive network of 
entrepreneurial educators and volunteers JA has. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this entire Assembly, I would like to 
congratulate Brad Wall on being inducted into the Junior 
Achievement Hall of Fame, and thank Junior Achievement for 
all the great work that they do. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Regina Philanthropists Win Citizen of the Year Award 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my great pleasure to focus a 
spotlight on a couple of Regina’s most active philanthropists, 

Doug and Gloria Archer. Gloria and Doug are residents of 
Regina Lakeview. They co-founded Knight Archer Insurance 
Brokers in 1981. Doug was mayor of Regina from 1988 to 
2000, certainly a good run by anyone’s standard. They’ve also 
strengthened the life of Regina residents with their strong vision 
to champion diversity and help care for our community’s 
children. 
 
Earlier this year, they were recognized for their incredible work. 
On January 1st of this year, the Archers were named 
co-recipients of CTV’s [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] 
Citizen of the Year Award for 2017. What an accomplishment, 
Mr. Speaker. This is well deserved. 
 
Gloria and Doug have spent many years volunteering in their 
community, just to name a few, with the University of Regina 
Cougar athletics; Regina Multicultural Council Celebration of 
Cultures, Mosaic; Habitat for Humanity; Run for the Cure; MS 
[multiple sclerosis] Super Cities Walk; and the Cystic Fibrosis 
Bike Run. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to all of this, Gloria and Doug are the 
driving force behind the annual Brighter Futures for Children 
benefit which has already raised over $750,000 for SCEP 
[Socialization, Communication, and Education Program] Centre 
and Regina’s Early Learning Centre. 
 
I ask all members to join me in saluting Gloria and Doug 
Archer on being named co-recipients of CTV’s Citizen of the 
Year Award for 2017 and for all the incredible work that they 
do in our community. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Swift Current. 
 

Impaired Driving Prevention Campaigns Recognized 
 
Mr. Hindley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise in the House today to recognize SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance] and two very important awards they’ll 
be receiving this June. It’s been announced that SGI will be the 
recipient of two recognitions at the International Association of 
Business Communicators Gold Quill Awards for two of their 
media campaigns: People Shouldn’t Disappear, and Be a Good 
Wingman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year there were 94 Awards of Excellence 
handed out and 164 Awards of Merit, representing 13 countries 
from around the world. The Gold Quill Awards are recognized 
globally as one of the most prestigious awards in the 
communications industry. 
 
The People Shouldn’t Disappear campaign kickoff media event 
is the recipient of the Award of Merit in the category of special 
events, and the Be a Good Wingman campaign has won the 
Award of Excellence in the category of marketing, advertising, 
and brand communication. 
 
Mr. Speaker, impaired driving is still a problem in 
Saskatchewan. The Minister for SGI as well as our government 
take road safety very seriously. We’ve been working hard to 
drive the message home that impaired driving is not acceptable. 
We’ve already made some changes regarding the penalties for 
impaired driving, and there will be more legislation coming. We 



April 18, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3919 

also want to thank the families who courageously share their 
stories through these media campaigns in order to bring the 
issue to the forefront so that we all remember the consequences 
of our actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members please join me in 
congratulating all those involved with the SGI campaigns on 
these awards. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Heart and Stroke Foundation Fundraiser 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently I, along 
with the Minister of Social Services, took part in the Heart and 
Stroke Foundation’s Hockey Heroes Weekend fundraising 
event in Saskatoon. The fundraiser had strong support from 
participants, sponsors, and the community. Together they raised 
$420,000 for awareness initiatives and CPR [cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation] training in the province. 
 
The event included 15 hockey teams playing in the round robin 
tournament. Mr. Speaker, part of the appeal was a 
once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for participants to play hockey 
alongside NHL [National Hockey League] alumni like great 
Montreal Canadiens Brian Skrudland and John Scott. This twist 
added an incentive for teams to raise money, as the top 
fundraiser was awarded the first pick for choosing a former 
NHL player. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Heart and Stroke Foundation along with the 
University of Saskatchewan College of Medicine have been 
instrumental partners in helping the Saskatchewan Health 
Research Foundation provide long-term funding for a stroke 
and research Chair in Saskatchewan. Under the leadership of 
stroke research Chair Dr. Michael Kelly, there are now 
province-wide protocols for emergency stroke evaluation and 
treatment. These protocols will help to ensure stroke patients 
receive intervention within those first few critical hours, as well 
as identify patients who may benefit from a clot-removal 
surgical procedure to improve chance of recovery. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to acknowledge everyone who raised 
funds and participated in the Hockey Heroes Weekend. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

Family Farm Wins Charolais Breeder of the Year Award 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise in 
this Assembly today to acknowledge the success of a local 
farmer in my constituency. Founded in 1993, Sliding Hills 
Charolais is a farming operation located south of Canora. The 
farm consists of a herd of 120 cows and 14 quarters of land 
used for both cash crops and pastures. They were recently 
awarded the 2017 Saskatchewan Charolais Breeder of the Year 
Award from the Saskatchewan Charolais Association for the 
farm’s work. 
 

Mr. Speaker, like so many farming operations across the 
province, Sliding Hills Charolais is family owned and operated. 
Carey and LeeAnn started the farm, but their children Sarah, 
Laura, and Dale have become significantly involved in the 
farming operations. In fact, the farm does all the farm work 
without any hired help. All three Weinbender children have or 
are working towards agriculture degrees from the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the family farm is truly the backbone of 
Saskatchewan. And as an old member of the farming 
community, it’s inspiring to see young farmers continue to 
make an impact on this industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the entire Assembly, I’d like to 
congratulate the Weinbender family for winning the 2017 
Saskatchewan Charolais Breeder of the Year Award and wish 
them the best in the future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Reesor Ranch Offers Award-Winning Hospitality 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I would like to 
talk to the Assembly about the Reesor Ranch, located in the 
Cypress Hills. Mr. Speaker, the Reesor Ranch is a 
fifth-generation homestead, established in 1904. In 2017, it was 
designated as Saskatchewan’s first provincial heritage ranch. 
Everyone enjoyed an authentic, good old western ranch 
experience by lodging in their ranch house or in one of their 
cozy rental cabins. The ranch is also home to a log barn which 
can be rented out for special occasions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the atmosphere of the historic Reesor Ranch is 
unique. There is a wealth of heritage to be discovered during 
your visit, learning about Canada’s early history and the 
Cypress Hills massacre, or take a tour of the area riding 
horseback, or take a guided walking or ATV [all-terrain 
vehicle] tour through the hills. The Ranch Hall Grill is available 
to serve the guests meals throughout their stay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2006 the Reesor Ranch won a Saskatchewan 
Tourism Award, making it no surprise that they have been 
awarded the Business of the Year employing just under 20 
people. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask everyone in the Assembly 
to join me in congratulating everyone at the Reesor Ranch for 
their hard work while helping keep Canada’s western roots 
alive. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Determination of Conflict of Interest 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday we learned 
that Bill Boyd, the Sask Party’s former Economy minister who 
resigned in the midst of a conflict of interest scandal, was fined 
$35,000 after pleading guilty to environmental charges. This 
was a minister that the former premier described as the DNA of 
the Sask Party. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, he promoted his irrigation project, his 



3920 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2018 

private project, while still a minister when he was in China. He 
went on to start the same irrigation project without getting prior 
approval from the Water Security Agency. He’s now been 
investigated and convicted for environmental charges relating to 
this project. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Boyd pressured the Water 
Security Agency and was able to get a difficult-to-get licence 
more quickly than usual, and the minister was the minister 
responsible for the water security at the time. 
 
With a past minister of the Crown now convicted, now 
convicted for abuses committed while in government, Mr. 
Speaker, what will the Premier do to make sure this never 
happens again? Will this Premier make changes to the conflict 
of interest legislation to prevent this kind of abuse? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is 
that there was some charges that were laid, Mr. Speaker, to a 
colleague of all of ours. There was four charges that were laid 
under The Environmental Management and Protection Act, and 
there was two of those charges that were pled guilty to, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, is that the people of 
the province can rest assured that this particular incident was 
investigated, Mr. Speaker. And the process that we have 
through the investigation, through the channels of justice, Mr. 
Speaker, this individual was treated in exactly the same fashion 
as any other individual would across the province of 
Saskatchewan. I think the people of this great province can feel 
so assured, Mr. Speaker, that this is a case . . . Everyone in this 
province is treated in an identical fashion in this type of an 
incident, Mr. Speaker, no matter who you are. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, no, people in this province should 
not all be treated in an identical fashion — the members of this 
House need to be held to a higher standard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday’s convictions are not the only possible 
charges hanging over Mr. Boyd’s time as a minister in this 
Saskatchewan Party government. The RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] investigation into land transactions at the 
Global Transportation Hub was concluded last November, Mr. 
Speaker. The results were forwarded to the Manitoba Crown 
prosecutors five months ago to review and determine next steps. 
 
Has there been an update on the status of this review? When 
will the people of Saskatchewan have the full story on this 
investigation, and what is the government doing to clear the air 
of scandal that continues to hang over the Global Transportation 
Hub? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
might want to weigh in to a prosecution or a police 
investigation. We’re not going to do that. The matter is with the 
Manitoba department of justice, and that’s where it’ll stay till 
it’s finished. We will make no inquiries. We’re not dealing with 
it. It’s up to them to finish it, and we’ll wait. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, the opening question remains. We 
are to be held to a higher standard. Conflict of interest of 
members in this House is something that needs to be 
investigated in great detail, and we have asked numerous times 
this session without getting an answer. Will this Premier take 
the steps to strengthen, as the Deputy Premier suggested, our 
conflict of interest legislation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have legislation that’s 
in place. That legislation precludes a minister from participating 
in or consideration on something that’s before cabinet before 
the matter is voted on. Mr. Speaker, if a member comes across 
that kind of situation, the member is by statute obliged to recuse 
himself. That happens on a regular basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of the members on this side of the House, and I 
presume on that side of the House, meet at least annually with 
the Conflict of Interest Commissioner. They review all of their 
affairs. They deal with those affairs, and they go back to the 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner for advice periodically. The 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner provides rulings where it is 
appropriate. And, Mr. Speaker, if the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner makes recommendations, we’ll look at those. 
 
If the members want to have further discussion about 
something, we’ll always be welcome to have that discussion. 
But, Mr. Speaker, what I do take strong exception with is with 
the inference that somebody has done something wrong or 
improper, because it’s simply not the case. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — There was sufficient concern, Mr. Speaker, for 
the RCMP to spend a significant amount of time with members 
on that side. Mr. Speaker, there was a conviction. There is 
evidence of a minister acting in conflict of interest, and we have 
a minister on that side who’s already requested a review of 
conflict of interest legislation. 
 
We’re very open to doing that, strengthening that legislation, 
Mr. Speaker. We have yet to hear a response of why this 
Premier would not be open, when we know that a cloud of 
scandal hangs over so many projects, why he would not be open 
to be making sure that there’s no possibility of even the 
impression of a conflict of interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
might well do well to discuss with the member that they have, 
or the two members that are members of the Law Society and 
get some discussion with them about when is it appropriate to 
weigh in to something that is before justice. And we do not 
interfere with that process in any way. A police investigation is 
something that ought be done totally separate from this 
government. It is and it will be, as is the process with 
prosecution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite talk about conflict of 



April 18, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3921 

interest. Mr. Speaker, that is something that those members 
ought to look at themselves on. The Leader of the Opposition 
took donations, took donations from 12 wealthy individuals. 
They donated almost 5,000 each to the leadership campaign, 
well in excess of their suggested limit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those individuals as well have no issue with taking 
donations from their union friends — $81,000 from UFCW 
[United Food & Commercial Workers], $54,000 from Unifor, 
37,000 from United Steelworkers, $35,000 from the Canadian 
Labour Congress. Mr. Speaker, they talk about not taking 
money from outside the province. They talk about not wanting 
to take money from corporations. Mr. Speaker, that group of 
people should . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Recruitment of Staff for Children’s Hospital 
 

Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, I’m certainly glad to hear that 
there’s more interest on that side in getting big money out of 
politics. We’ve been on that train for a long time, and we’re 
very happy to head down that road. We’d also really love an 
answer, at some point, on strengthening the conflict of interest 
legislation. We continue to hear nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we do hear from this government is boasting 
about the approaching completion of the $300 million 
children’s hospital in Saskatoon. Having a great children’s 
hospital would be wonderful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
However the Peachey report, commissioned by the Ministry of 
Health, has revealed that there are significant challenges in the 
government’s ability to adequately staff that children’s hospital. 
Saskatchewan has fewer pediatricians per capita than any 
province that has a children’s hospital, and this government has 
set staffing targets that are lower than the recommendations 
commissioned by its own ministry. In general pediatrics alone, 
the Peachey report recommended 60 general pediatricians. 
There are currently less than 15 in Saskatoon, the city that’s 
going to have this children’s hospital — less than 10 full-time 
positions — and people, pediatricians ready to work. 
 
Where are the positions, Mr. Speaker? What is this 
government’s plan to ensure sufficient number of pediatric 
specialists for the children’s hospital in Saskatoon so that 
Saskatchewan’s kids will get the care they need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
great deal of work has gone into recruiting for all types of 
specialists, Mr. Speaker. The vast majority of the specialists 
have already been recruited. Dr. Givelichian who is in charge of 
this, assures us that we’re, if not ahead of schedule, at least on 
schedule for recruitment, Mr. Speaker. We’re recruiting a 
number of different specialties, Mr. Speaker, well in advance of 
the kickoff for the new hospital, which is on time and on 
budget, Mr. Speaker. I have great faith in Dr. Givelichian’s 
ability to continue to do that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

Support for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, that’s less than a quarter of what’s 
needed. And the Sask Party loves to talk of their support for 
kids but the numbers tell a much different story. Regina Public 
has welcomed over 1,700 new students since 2014. In order to 
maintain class sizes and basic levels of support, the division 
would have had to have added 110 additional teachers over that 
same time period. Instead, due to underfunding, they’ve only 
been able to add 12. That’s enough students to fill five or six 
schools, Mr. Speaker, but only enough teachers to fill about half 
a staff room. 
 
How can that minister say with a straight face that the Sask 
Party is doing enough to support our children’s education? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, with a straight face 
I’ll tell you this: we’ve invested an additional $30 million in 
this year’s budget to support classrooms around this province, 
Mr. Speaker. We’ve also committed to an ongoing conversation 
with school boards, with teachers, with trustees, and with 
parents, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that we are supporting 
children in the classroom to an appropriate level, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re going to continue to have those conversations. 
 
I’ve just received, Mr. Speaker, the enrolment projections for 
the fall, and I’m going to have a talk with my ministry. I’m 
going to have a talk with school board trustees to see what that 
looks like, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that we are providing the 
right resources. 
 
But for the member to stand up and say that this government 
has no commitment, Mr. Speaker, to public education, I just ask 
her to look at the budget: $30 million in additional resources, 
Mr. Speaker, $30 million which will support children in our 
classrooms, Mr. Speaker. And that’s not to mention the $41 
million, Mr. Speaker, that we got from the federal government 
to help support early years, Mr. Speaker. This all shows a 
commitment on the part of this government to support children 
in our classrooms. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, predictably that minister keeps 
going back to his $30 million offering and more talk. Year over 
year, funding still represents over a $20 million cut to our 
children’s classrooms, and it’s having a direct impact on the 
quality of education. As charts from the school division show, 
the Sask Party’s failures to fully fund education is having a 
direct impact. With growing class sizes and complexity there is 
so much more support that’s needed in our children’s 
classrooms. And more of the same underfunding simply isn’t 
good enough. 
 
The minister loves to talk about the so-called efficiencies they 
have forced on school divisions over the last round of cuts. 
Does he count the 98 missing students from Regina Public 
Schools as one of those efficiencies? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 



3922 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2018 

[14:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I have talked about 
efficiencies. I have talked about efficiencies, Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to school divisions. And I would think that the people of 
Saskatchewan would expect their governments, would expect 
their school boards, would expect their municipal councils, Mr. 
Speaker, to look for efficiencies where they need to find 
efficiencies, Mr. Speaker. It only makes sense when you’re 
protecting the taxpayer’s dollar, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll 
continue to encourage school divisions to look for efficiencies 
within their operations, Mr. Speaker, because the more 
efficiencies they find within their operations, the more supports 
there are for the classroom. 
 
But I’ll return to my original comment, Mr. Speaker. This 
government is committed to continuing to support public 
education, to support the children in this province, because we 
understand that ensuring that we provide the right supports for 
children guarantees the future success of this province both 
economically and socially, Mr. Speaker. We’ll continue to do 
that, and we’ll continue to have the conversations that we need 
to have, Mr. Speaker, so that we make sure that we are 
providing the right supports. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Provincial Sales Tax Exemptions 
 
Ms. Sproule: — In 2007 members opposite ran on a promise to 
do away with the PST [provincial sales tax] on used cars. And 
let’s recall, Mr. Speaker, it was their former leader, Brad Wall, 
who said government should avoid doing dumb things, and the 
idea of charging the PST on the same used car over and over 
again seems pretty dumb. Now that they’re pinching pennies, 
the Sask Party’s perfectly fine with taking $95 million out of 
consumers’ pockets. 
 
And it wasn’t so long ago that that Finance minister used to 
stand in her place presenting petitions asking, “Please do not tax 
our food.” And that Premier and that Finance minister and most 
of the front bench campaigned on making life a little more 
affordable for Saskatchewan families by expanding PST 
exemptions for kids’ clothes. It was the first release off the 
printer after the 2011 election, Mr. Speaker — promise kept. 
 
Fast-forward all these years later and now the Sask Party is 
taxing used cars, taxing kids’ clothes, and taxing restaurant 
meals. What changed? How can the Sask Party justify this 
stunning hypocrisy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I don’t think the member opposite has 
been listening to this government now for a couple years. What 
changed was resource revenues fell by $1.3 billion. That’s what 
changed. So the economic revenues for this province changed 
and changed dramatically. 
 
We’re committed for those services for the people of 
Saskatchewan and be able to have them sustainable into the 
future, Mr. Speaker. That’s in health care; that’s in education; 

that’s in social safety net programs, Mr. Speaker. But 
somewhere we have to find the revenue in order to do that. 
That’s what changed. 
 
It’s funny how she’s criticizing it. We’ve gone to a very similar 
manner in treating used cars as her NDP [New Democratic 
Party] Party used when they were in government, Mr. Speaker. 
Now she calls it silly. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s difficult decisions that we have to make. 
It’s no surprise we have been shifting from our reliance on 
resource revenue to that of consumption, Mr. Speaker. This is 
substantial income that will not hurt the economy. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

SaskPower Rates 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Finance minister 
turned to page 62 of the budget. She compared the cost of living 
that Saskatchewan people are faced with to the taxes and fees 
people in other parts of the country pay. But she failed to 
mention, Mr. Speaker, on that same page, families in our 
province pay some of the highest power bills in the country. 
And with their indecision on Boundary dam 4 and 5, 
Saskatchewan families are bracing for even more tax hikes to 
pay for more carbon capture experiments. 
 
Yesterday the SaskPower minister made it clear. The decision 
on Boundary dam 4 and 5 is one that is up to this cabinet. So to 
the Finance minister: does she support spending billions more 
on carbon capture for Boundary dam 4 and 5, and how much 
higher will that drive our SaskPower bills? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, obviously we know and SaskPower knows that they 
need to work hard to ensure that we keep rates affordable for 
residents and industry all across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would note that next door to us, Manitoba Hydro 
is seeking annual increases of 7.9 per cent for the next two 
years — actually in fact until 2023-24. Mr. Speaker, obviously 
Alberta has a different way that their rates are set but certainly 
their rates will be impacted by a carbon tax, Mr. Speaker, as 
well as British Columbia is seeking a 3 per cent increase this 
year, and rates have increased 24 per cent over the last five 
years, Mr. Speaker. What we’re not going to do . . . And 
certainly that doesn’t even touch on what’s happened in 
Ontario. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously we need to balance off ensuring that 
rates are competitive while also ensuring that we’re doing our 
part to reduce emissions, Mr. Speaker. And as the members 
know, 2 million tonnes of carbon dioxide have been sequestered 
safely underground and have helped enhance oil recovery, 
which obviously helps the revenue for the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Those are the decisions that we’ll 
have to make going forward. 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 



April 18, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3923 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the rates in Saskatchewan are not 
acceptable. Families in Saskatchewan are paying an average of 
$1,377 for their SaskPower bills, but in Alberta it’s only $908 
and in Manitoba it’s only $746. Families from our neighbours 
to the east and west pay hundreds of dollars less each year 
because power companies in their provinces aren’t forcing 
ratepayers to fork over billions on misguided investments and 
post-combustion carbon capture, utilization, and storage. 
 
Now we asked the Finance minister whether she’s going to 
support imposing that on tax ratepayers in the future. She didn’t 
answer. I’m going to ask the SaskPower minister: can he tell us, 
how is it fair that Saskatchewan families should have to pay so 
much more? And how will he vote when the decision to expand 
CCS [carbon capture and storage] to BD4 [Boundary dam 4] 
and 5 finally makes its way to the cabinet table? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well as I’ve indicated in the past, Mr. 
Speaker, we know that for a number of years, over the last 
number of years, we’ve had zero per cent increases for 
SaskPower. Obviously we’ve had an increase this year, last year 
as well, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what I don’t think that those 
numbers that she’s referencing take into account is the fact that 
as I just indicated, Manitoba Hydro, which obviously hasn’t 
relied on coal-fired generation, they rely on hydro generation. 
But still, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to see nearly 8 per cent 
annual increases from now until 2023-24, Mr. Speaker, so we’ll 
see what those numbers do to the power rates in Manitoba. 
 
Next door in Alberta, Mr. Speaker, obviously a carbon tax is 
going to have an impact on power rates, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 
I’ve had people from Alberta that I know that have sent me 
their gas bills, their power bills, and notice that the carbon tax 
on a gas bill in Alberta almost equates to the dollar amount that 
is spent on the actual gas that is consumed. That’s what a 
carbon tax is doing in Alberta, Mr. Speaker, and we know it’s 
happening in British Columbia as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So obviously we have to balance off ensuring that we have the 
power to supply to the people in an affordable way, and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. Recognize the member from 
Prince Albert Northcote. 
 

Municipal Revenue Sharing 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association] has been arguing that since the province has 
downloaded costs onto Saskatchewan towns and cities, stripped 
them of additional revenue sources, cut funding for urban parks 
and highway connectors, froze the community rink affordability 
grant and Main Street Saskatchewan, that they have a right to 
their fair share of the expanded PST introduced in the 
calculation for municipal revenue sharing, which only makes 
sense. 
 
Instead what they’ve heard from the Sask Party is that it will be 
frozen at the lowest it has been in six years. How is that fair? 
They are making hometowns pay more in fees and taxes while 
they’re getting significantly less than their fair share from the 
Saskatchewan Party. 

Will the minister commit today that Saskatchewan towns and 
cities will in fact get the full point of the ever-expanding PST 
revenues they have no choice but to pay? 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, we have a very strong and 
solid relationship with our stakeholder partners. We’ve had a 
very lengthy agreement with them on our municipal 
revenue-sharing agreement that’s provided tremendous amounts 
of revenue to them on a very reliable and steady basis over 
time. We’re not going to lose that relationship with them. We 
have promised them that we’ll have stakeholder engagement to 
review the entire program to see if it still continues to fit their 
needs and where we’re at. 
 
As we’ve enhanced our infrastructure over time, we’ve built 
new bridges; we’ve had new facilities in place; we’ve added 
160,000 more people to the province. All of these have specific 
demands on our province, but we have continued to provide that 
kind of revenue sharing with our partners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the last 11 years the NDP were in government 
provided a total of $818 million. That’s a small pittance to what 
they were able to share with our municipal stakeholders. $2.5 
billion is what we’ve provided our municipal stakeholders in 
the last number of years, Mr. Speaker. We will continue to 
support them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — It isn’t just that Saskatchewan towns and 
cities are paying more and getting less. On budget day, SUMA 
President Gordon Barnhart said the expanded PST is a serious 
barrier to desperately needed infrastructure upgrades. He said 
the current infrastructure funding comes nowhere near meeting 
the needs and that the PST being charged on construction 
materials is hurting municipalities. He said: 
 

We get a grant from the federal government, we get a grant 
from the province, and then we have to do the cost 
matching, and then we pay PST on that. A lot of 
communities have raised the right amount of money and 
then didn’t have enough to cover the PST, and that has 
really hit them hard. SUMA says one of the most serious 
issues for municipalities is coming up with the money for 
the infrastructure cost share, a challenge that has only been 
made worse by the expansion of the PST. 

 
Again to the minister: will he commit to providing cities and 
towns across the province their fair share of the PST revenues 
moving forward? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, the municipal 
revenue-sharing agreement that we’ve got with our stakeholders 
is really the envy of the nation. We’ve got a number of 
provinces around us wish that they had the same opportunity 
that we’ve provided our stakeholder groups. 



3924 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2018 

Mr. Speaker, we have been committed to renewing and 
investing in infrastructure in this province and certainly been 
asking our stakeholders’ engagement in how these programs 
should be looking in the future. Mr. Speaker, municipalities saw 
$412.9 million in direct provincial support in the 2018-19 
budget for infrastructure. We’ve had a number of programs. 
We’ve had $73.8 million to provide a New Building Canada 
Fund, 12.5 million Clean Water and Wastewater Fund, $15 
million provided to Saskatoon for the north commuter bridge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are commitments that we’ve made to our 
stakeholders to ensuring that they’ve got the services they can 
provide their communities moving into the future. Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve invested nearly $15 billion in . . . more than double what 
the NDP has over that same period in time to infrastructure 
within this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Saskatoon Freeway Project 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
Sask Party’s former leader used to say the best predictor of 
future behaviour is past behaviour. But in the case of the 
bypass, we’re really hoping that wasn’t the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yesterday we asked about the Saskatoon bypass seeming an 
awful lot like the Regina bypass whose price tag ballooned to 
$2 billion. It has come under fire from the Provincial Auditor, 
and the Regina bypass is subject to dozens of lawsuits costing 
millions of dollars. 
 
Well the minister rolled into the rotunda to clear the air, and I 
quote: “It’s no different than we did on the Regina bypass.” Are 
you kidding me? Mr. Speaker, are they going to do this again? 
It’s exactly what they did with the Regina bypass — that is the 
problem. Did the minister not read, or does he not care what the 
auditor wrote in her report? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the Saskatoon 
freeway project, Mr. Speaker, we have narrowed the scope of 
where the freeway is going to go. We have narrowed that scope 
to 500 metres, Mr. Speaker. We are in the design phase of the 
north side of the Saskatoon bypass on that way. We’ve worked 
with the city of Saskatoon. We’ve notified the rural 
municipality of Corman Park on where that 500 kilometre 
right-of-way is going to be. We’ve engaged that process. We’ve 
listened to the Provincial Auditor starting that process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to be very clear. The Saskatoon freeway 
is a long way down the road, Mr. Speaker. It is beyond the 
five-year time frame. We are starting the planning process. We 
are taking the recommendations of the auditor and starting the 
process of where the freeway is going to go. 
 
Unlike the members opposite with the Regina bypass, that 
discussion started with the NDP in the ’90s, Mr. Speaker. They 
could have started land acquisitions there. They did absolutely 
nothing, Mr. Speaker. We started the process. We got the 
Regina bypass. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to save lives and 
we’re going to save a lot of lives, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Saving lives is very important. But saving 
taxpayer money is as well. Let me clear the air a little, Mr. 
Speaker. The auditor — and I’ll be very slow on this one — the 
auditor said consultations that took place provided business 
owners and municipalities a good indication of where the route 
would go. She said this insight could have led to land 
speculation and skyrocketing costs. And I know the members 
opposite don’t seem to have much concern for what they do 
with taxpayers’ money, but Saskatchewan people cannot afford 
to have the Sask Party screw up another multi-billion-dollar 
megaproject. 
 
[14:15] 
 
To the minister: what’s the expected cost of this project, and 
will the profits be staying in Saskatchewan instead of being 
snowplowed away to a corporation in France? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon freeway 
project is a long way down the road. We haven’t even started 
the process of cost estimation on this. What we have started is 
what the auditor had put in the recommendations of narrowing 
the scope of where the project might happen . . .  
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Can’t hear questions or 
answers. Recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have started 
the process of where the Saskatoon freeway, where possibly it 
might go. We have narrowed that scope to a 500-metre window, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s the width that we have looked at. We have 
narrowed that scope in process of what the Provincial Auditor 
had asked us to do. We are just in that process, Mr. Speaker. 
The freeway is years down the road, Mr. Speaker. It’s just in the 
preliminary stages of designing where that freeway will go, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Rail Transportation Issues 
 
Ms. Beck: — Issues with grain transportation over the last five 
years have cost producers in our province billions, with 
potential for further delays as there may be another 
transportation crisis by noon on Saturday. Our national rail 
companies have failed to meet their obligations and get our 
products to market in a fast and efficient manner. Successive 
federal governments have allowed rail companies to run 
roughshod over producers. 
 
And producers are being forced to deal with consequences 
while railways have laid off staff and closed producer loading 
sites. APAS [Agricultural Producers Association of 
Saskatchewan] President Todd Lewis is calling for federal 
changes that would see demurrage charges paid for by the 
railways instead of millions in penalties for producers. 
 



April 18, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3925 

My question: what is the Sask Party doing to ensure our grain 
transportation system actually works? And will he join us and 
APAS in calling on Ottawa to force the railways to pick up the 
tab on demurrage charges when grain doesn’t get loaded in port 
on time? 

The Speaker: — Recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
railway transportation remains a priority for our government. 
Unfortunately, we’ve . . . There is some news that that member 
may not yet be aware of. CP’s [Canadian Pacific Railway] 
unions gave notice to strike April 18th. Minister Marit and I 
asked the federal government for back-to-work legislation to 
ensure movement of goods, so I can assure the member that 
we’re a ways ahead of where she’s at today. 

We will continue, Mr. Speaker, to be actively engaged with the 
federal government to ensure that Saskatchewan continues to 
have equitable access to rail, adequate levels of service, and 
competitive prices. On May 16th, 2017, Mr. Speaker, the 
federal Minister of Transport introduced the Transportation 
Modernization Act. We have been keeping in touch with both 
railways and . . . 

The Speaker: — Thank you. 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that the Assembly approves 
in general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a pleasure to 
be able to stand in the House to address the budget today and to 
support the amendment that my colleague has put forward. 
Before I get started with my comments directly on the budget, 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to, as is custom, mention a few people, 
mention a few people that have had a very important role in my 
life, especially in this past year. 

I want to thank the residents of Saskatoon Meewasin who just 
over a year ago were kind enough to put their confidence in me 
and elect me as the Member of the Legislative Assembly for 
Meewasin. And I hope that I am able to earn their respect and 
make them happy with that decision, Mr. Speaker. 

One of the people who I fully believe is able to do that is 
Jasmine Liska, my constituency assistant in Saskatoon 
Meewasin, who is doing an incredible amount of work. She’s so 
strong on the casework, such a great representative day to day, 
as I need to be on the road so much. She’s able to keep that 

office running so well, extremely strong person. I’m very 
fortunate to have the chance to work with Jasmine Liska. 

I also want to mention the members of the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
We had over 13,000 members at the end of January, over 81 per 
cent of whom cast their vote in a leadership race. It was a 
positive race, had so many people who participated, and just a 
ton of work that went in from the staff at the party office, the 
executive members from the different constituencies, the 
president. Everyone who was involved did an incredible amount 
of work to make sure that that race ran well and people had a 
chance to express their democratic option, Mr. Speaker. 

I want to also add thanks to our caucus staff. We have an 
incredible group here in the legislature, Mr. Speaker, who work, 
every day, hours that certainly don’t match up with the pay, Mr. 
Speaker. They work hard, long hours. We’re a small and 
scrappy crew in opposition, but that group punches above their 
weight and they keep us informed and ready to come into this 
House. We are so grateful for the work that they do. 

I also want to point out the work of this caucus team. I’m so 
grateful to be able to be part of this team, to have their support, 
such a hard-working, committed, intelligent, almost all of them 
very good-looking group of members of the legislative 
assessment. I’m the one exception, members, just so you know. 
I’m the one exception. A great bunch of folks to argue, to 
discuss, to debate, and to come in here as a united team ready to 
put forth the best ideas, the best options for the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

Of course, on the personal side of things, I’ve been so lucky 
throughout my life and especially in this last very busy year to 
have the support of my family. My parents, Wally and Lea in 
Moose Jaw which, regardless what the member of Moose Jaw 
North might suggest, are pretty big supporters. We get along 
pretty well . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’m sure they do. 
Yes, thanks very much. And have been an incredible amount of 
support, you know, through this process and to the family. 

And to Mahli Brindamour, my wife — who is a pediatrician 
working with refugee populations, doing incredible work in 
Saskatoon and in La Loche and Ile-a-la-Crosse — this year on 
maternity leave, home with Augustin or Gus, our little guy. 
He’s seven months old. And we’ve also got, of course, 
Abraham, my companion on the road and my top adviser. He’s 
six and a half and great to spend time with. Very proud of that 
boy. 

Mr. Speaker, to get to today’s budget or this year’s budget, 
budgets are the clearest and most powerful means that a 
government has to set its own direction and to highlight the 
direction of the province. Now they’re a powerful statement of 
what a government stands for, what it values, what it aspires to, 
and the plan to get there.  

A good budget focuses on smart investments and the things that 
keep us healthy: good jobs and a sustainable economy; a 
world-class education, equipping the next generation of leaders 
with the skills they need to thrive; the health system that not 
only takes care of us when we’re ill but supports us to be well; 
and a plan to make sure that everyone has a chance at their best 
life, has access to decent housing, to affordable, nutritious food. 



3926 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2018 

And the biggest question that we must ask ourselves when we 
assess a budget is, will this document, will this plan improve 
our lives or not? Will more people be healthier and happier 
because of the choices that are made? Have these choices 
contributed to a province that will be continuously getting 
better? 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the budget we have before us, this 
Premier’s first and most important test, fails to satisfactorily 
answer that question. If we ask what statement does this budget 
really make, it’s a statement that you shouldn’t expect any 
better, that you should get used to paying more and getting less. 
It’s a statement of a government that’s clinging to a story that 
doesn’t work for people, doesn’t work for the economy. 
 
It may be the first budget of a new Premier, Mr. Speaker, but 
it’s got a very clear heritage. It’s very much the budget of a 
tired government, a government that’s been in power too long. 
It’s out of ideas, who has a short-sighted approach that has seen 
them squander a resource revenue boom they were happy to 
take credit for, but didn’t have the wisdom or foresight to 
manage for the long term. 
 
In the past few years we’ve seen this government fumble the 
downturn for which they’d failed to prepare. They’ve tried to 
cut their way back to growth, axing programs or selling off the 
very things that make us strong. And people around 
Saskatchewan are taking notice. People who were willing to 
give this government the benefit of the doubt are now sitting up 
and taking notice, asking how we failed so badly to invest 
during the good times and how, after a decade of record 
revenues, now we’re faced with record debt. 
 
It’s a budget that can’t be viewed in isolation. Last year’s 
budget provoked a powerful, protective response from the 
people of this province that speaks to the core of who we are, to 
the strength and resilience of our communities, to our 
determination to hold our government to the highest standard 
because we can accept no less. 
 
That budget provoked a widespread movement that forced this 
government to walk back several of the least popular measures 
— cuts to funerals for people who die while living in poverty, 
cuts to libraries, things that made no sense — and it led to the 
most popular premier in the country to end up making for the 
exit and sniping from the sidelines of the corporate speaker 
circuit, Mr. Speaker. And it leaves us with a lingering sense that 
this is a government that is running on steam. 
 
I’ve toured the province, as have these members around me. 
We’ve toured the province this last year since the last budget, 
and we’ve heard so many stories of the way the choices in that 
budget hurt people directly: seniors who had to move into the 
city because they no longer had transport to town for 
appointments, stories of patients with conditions like diabetes or 
HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] who lost their special 
diet funding, or parents that are distraught over cuts to their 
children’s classrooms. 
 
In this year’s budget the Sask Party learned to tread a bit more 
carefully, but it’s the same bankrupt approach. Budgets tell a 
story. While this one might not be the raging dumpster fire of a 
year ago, that fire still smoulders and those damaging cuts are 

still hurting people. This year’s budget only adds further fuel to 
those flames. 
 
This year’s budget is a story of a lack of vision, of missed 
opportunity, and of doubling down on a failed austerity 
approach. It’s a story of a government that’s asleep at the 
switch on the greatest challenges facing our province: no action 
on the slumping economy with growing poverty, with growing 
unemployment; no action on climate change; no action on 
reconciliation and closing the gap and outcomes between First 
Nations and Métis people and the rest of the province. 
 
Worse than silent on these existential challenges we face to our 
way of life, to our relations to one another and the land that 
supports us, this budget actually moves us backwards, cutting 
the climate change branch by 18 per cent — that’s an 80 per 
cent cut since 2012 — cutting employment programs to get 
people back to work, cutting support for First Nations and Métis 
students to advance in their education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Perhaps the most telling sign that this government fails to 
understand why social investment . . . is the government’s press 
release with this budget that boasted for the second year in a 
row of the highest expenditure in social services in the 
province’s history. Now that sounds — and we’ve heard some 
of the members across say, how can you be complaining about 
that? — and it sounds like it might be a good and generous 
thing until you look into the fine print, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You realize that spending on social assistance isn’t going up 
because people are getting more. It’s not because we’re actually 
having a plan to reduce poverty. It’s just that there’s more 
people on social assistance. In fact the rates which provide 
people on the margins with very, very little, that should allow 
them enough to eat, enough to have a place to stay, they’ve 
remained unchanged for over a decade, and a decade in which 
the cost of living has grown tremendously, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So let’s be clear. We’ve got a government that’s out there 
boasting about spending more on social services, not because 
they’re making the investment needed to provide the supports 
that will help people pull themselves out of poverty. They’re 
spending more because people are living in poverty, because 
more people are living in poverty — a direct result, a direct 
result of a decade of neglect, a decade of growth in inequalities. 
Costs are rising in health, in social services, in justice because 
this government has doubled down on missing opportunities for 
upstream investments, doubled down on austerity by removing 
the housing supplement that for some means the difference 
between having a place to call home and finding themselves out 
on the street. 
 
[14:30] 
 
We also see the damage done, Mr. Speaker, by last year’s 
choices. They remain in effect this year. We see that damage 
reflected in the poor job numbers that we see compared to our 
neighbours in the West. We see that damage in declining 
restaurant revenues because PST has been added to the bill. We 
see it in slumping home sales and in rising numbers of families 
falling behind on their mortgage payment, a 40 per cent 
increase in the last five years, a rate three times the national 
average. 



April 18, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3927 

People are struggling, Mr. Speaker, under the increased cost of 
living because of budget choices, budget choices like the 
addition of PST to construction labour, to restaurant meals, to 
kid’s clothes, and now to used cars, an addition that makes life 
less affordable and slows down our economy in a time of much 
needed stimulation. 
 
As the former premier said about the idea of taxing the same 
used car over and over again, government should avoid doing 
dumb things, and that seemed pretty dumb. In the spirit of 
avoiding doing dumb things, Mr. Speaker, we’d like to see this 
government change its approach away from seeking to cut its 
way to growth, which has been shown around the world and 
right here at home to hurt people and to slow down our 
economic recovery. It’s the exact opposite of what’s needed to 
build a healthy society. 
 
Sadly this failed approach has been the guiding idea of this 
government over the last few years and the reason that people 
have been losing faith in this government. It’s the fallacy of a 
false economy, of stepping over dollars to pick up dimes, of 
making short-term cuts that cost us big for years to come. 
 
Everyone who has managed a household budget intuitively 
understands this notion of a false economy, and especially 
Saskatchewan families today who face the daily challenge of 
doing more with less. It’s making the minimum payment on a 
credit card bill each month because the monthly budget is so 
squeezed, but the interest charges are adding up. It’s not having 
your car serviced until the indicator light goes on. You know 
we’re all guilty of this sort of action sometimes, but yet we 
expect better, we need better from our government. We expect 
our elected representatives to put the time and thought into 
planning ahead, especially when we see the costs and the lost 
revenues adding up after years of false economy government. 
 
Perhaps the worst example of this, Mr. Speaker, is the inaction 
already mentioned on addressing poverty — $3.8 billion each 
year and that’s probably a conservative estimate, Mr. Speaker. 
$3.8 billion lost each year to our economy because of increased 
costs in health, in justice, and social services that are a direct 
result of failure to act on poverty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot more debit than credit in this budget, 
but I will take a moment to give credit where credit is due. It 
can’t all be bad, Mr. Speaker, and there are things, things that 
we’ve been asking for for a while, that we saw show up in this 
budget. 
 
I must comment on the positive choice that was deciding to 
cover antiretroviral drugs for people who have HIV. Since 2015 
we’ve been advocating for that step. It’s good to see it finally in 
place because it makes sense. When somebody is on those 
medications, it improves their health. It also makes it almost 
impossible for them to transmit the illness to someone else. 
That’s an upstream investment that makes a real difference in 
the lives of the individual and those around them, moving into 
that mode of thinking of, where do we invest now that can save 
us money in the long term, that can grow our economy? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been talking a lot about what’s wrong 
with this budget. And often the question we get, and it’s a fair 
question, well what would you do differently? What would a 

good budget look like? Well, Mr. Speaker, a good budget starts 
with a vision. It starts with a vision of a healthy society, a 
province where everyone has the chance to live their best life. It 
would start with an evidence-based and forward-thinking shift 
away from that false economy, that 
penny-wise-and-pound-foolish approach that does so much 
damage to our budget and our economy. It would involve 
thinking of social investment in terms of return on investment, 
both in increased economic activity and in future savings on 
spending on corrections, on social services, on health. 
 
You know, I’ve seen members on the other side waving around 
a document once in a while, Mr. Speaker, things that they 
pulled from ideas discussed during the NDP leadership 
campaign. And I won’t spend too much time talking about the 
false economy and false accounting in that. We know that this 
government has a talent to see things balloon to billions of 
dollars. The issue isn’t so much the calculations that were 
made. It’s that it was missing a column. It was missing a 
column. 
 
It looked at every one of those investments and said, here’s a 
cost. Looked at investments in early childhood development 
and said, here’s how much that would cost us. Mr. Speaker, for 
every dollar you put into early childhood education, your 
economy grows; your GDP [gross domestic product] grows by 
$1.50 to $1.70. That’s just the GDP effect. It makes no mention 
of the 6 to $10 down the road that are saved in additional costs 
when that kid has a chance to thrive and have a great life 
instead of struggling. That’s the kind of investments that a good 
budget would be seeking out, Mr. Speaker, those upstream 
investments in the things that promote long-term economic 
prosperity and long-term quality of life. 
 
It would also look to save where saving is appropriate, using 
mechanisms like Choosing Wisely. Approximately 30 per cent 
of health budgets are spent on procedures, medications, etc., 
that actually don’t work. And if we used a program where we’re 
doing evidence-based care, we could decrease costs 
considerably and have those funds available — not to respond 
to people’s ill health, but to invest in keeping them healthy in 
the first place. 
 
A good budget would involve a commitment to supporting the 
creation of good jobs and a sustainable economy. One that 
protects and supports workers in industries like oil and gas and 
heavy industry, but also invests in the clean energy 
infrastructure of the future and the good jobs that will get it 
built and keep it running. 
 
It would involve the commitment to move beyond words. The 
nice words of reconciliation which are very important, but to 
move beyond those words to taking action, to closing the gap in 
health outcomes, in justice outcomes, in income, and education. 
And it would pay for these wise investments by taking a wise 
approach to making sure we get a fair share on our 
non-renewable energy resources, all of our non-renewable 
resources, by making sure that those who benefit the most — 
the companies and individuals that benefit the most — 
contribute back. 
 
Unlike what we saw last year when this government decided to 
increase the PST and broaden the number of things that it 



3928 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2018 

applied to, shifting taxation at the same time as they cut taxes 
for the wealthiest in the province, so that if you were one of the 
bottom 10 per cent of earners after last year’s budget, you saw 
your taxes increase as 2 per cent of your income. If you’re in 
the middle, it went up by 1 per cent. If you’re at the top, it went 
up by nothing at all. Shifting in the wrong direction so that 
those who can afford the least are once again, under this 
government, paying the most, Mr. Speaker. Which is why this 
year’s budget is so clearly off track. In fact, it threatens to derail 
much of what makes us strong. 
 
In a province as blessed as ours, there’s no excuse for such a 
disappointing, short-sighted budget, a budget that lacks a vision, 
a budget that lacks a plan. The people of this province, the 
people of Saskatchewan expect and deserve better. And that’s 
why, Mr. Speaker, the members of the opposition will be voting 
for the amendment tabled by our Finance critic. People deserve 
better. Our children deserve better. Future generations deserve 
better. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour 
and a pleasure to stand in front of you today in the Legislative 
Assembly to speak in support of the Finance minister’s 2018 
and ’19 budget. But before I do that, Mr. Speaker, I would like 
to take this opportunity to pass my sincere condolences on to 
the relatives, teammates, and friends impacted by the tragic 
Humboldt Broncos team bus crash a while ago. 
 
Many in our rural communities have ridden a hockey bus and 
know the friendships and bonds that develop with teammates, 
coaches, and fans alike. And many in my constituency know 
someone, a relative or a friend, who’s been closely impacted by 
this tragedy. This has hit close to home in our communities. 
Several in my own constituency have played on the Bronco 
team or played against them. Some team members have been 
placed with families that are very close to . . . in my 
constituency and very close to my hometown. They became like 
family. My condolences to all the people that were involved in 
that tragic situation. 
 
Before I make any further comment on the budget though, I 
would like to also take this opportunity to thank my family 
members for all their support over the years I’ve been in office. 
It has been greatly appreciated. Since being elected as MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] in the constituency of 
Arm River, I’m honoured to . . . that I’m honoured to represent 
all the fine members in the Arm River constituency and also . . . 
It used to be Arm River-Watrous. 
 
I would also like to take this time to acknowledge the work of 
my two CAs [constituency assistant], Lavonne and Donna, who 
do all the work in my constituency while I’m up here. Without 
their help, I would not be able to be in Regina doing my job in 
the legislature. Lavonne and Donna represent myself in the 
community and also at my constituency office, handling the 
case work that comes in there. Basically the whole time I’m up 
here in session I’m just trying to give them advice by phone, but 
usually they’re the ones giving me advice. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, as a government we are in the second 
year of a three-year plan to get back to balance. The 2018-2019 

budget keeps Saskatchewan on track with major investments in 
health, education, social services, infrastructure, and all the 
while steadily improving the outlook of the province over the 
next four years. In this year, the second year of our three-year 
plan, the government is fiscally staying on track. Our focus has 
included revenue and expense measures. The ongoing effort by 
the Government of Saskatchewan has continued to control 
spending in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that many of the ministers and members 
on this side of the House have spoken in support of the 2018 
and ’19 budget as it relates to their portfolios and also their 
constituencies. I too would like to add my comments and 
support in this budget debate. 
 
First of all I am proud that our deficit is falling. The capital plan 
is working and debt growth has slowed. Recovery is now well 
under way and we’re on track. Our government is staying on 
track by not increasing tax rates, by keeping our economy 
strong, and a return to balance. Not only that, Mr. Speaker, we 
continue to deliver high-quality services to the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we will have a projected deficit this year, 
the return to balance is forecast for 2019-2020 . . . is strong 
along with a modest surplus of $6 million in 2019 and 2020. 
This, along with a higher surplus of 108 million in 2020-2021, 
and even a higher surplus of 212 million in 2021-2022 budget, 
is being projected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while staying on track, our government has made 
record funding investments in Saskatchewan health of 5.36 
billion, an increase of 2.9 from the 2017-2018 budget. This 
includes a $600,000 investment which will provide universal 
drug coverage for 100 per cent HIV coverage, 50,000 for AIDS 
Saskatoon, and another 50,000 to Saskatoon’s Westside Clinic 
to provide additional HIV supports. 
 
Autistic children will receive individual funding of $4,000 for 
an autistic child up to the age of six years. The total funding for 
this is $28 million. Newborn hearing screening has been 
implemented. 
 
Budgeting for the social services and assistance is increased by 
25 million to a record 1.38 billion. Funding will be targeted to 
communities who provide direct daily care to adults with 
intellectual disabilities or mental health challenges. This will 
include direct supports to families and daily care for children in 
need of protection, CBOs [community-based organization], and 
family-focused services. 
 
Funding is increased for family services. Example, for foster 
parents, continue to be supported. Mental health, which is a 
very challenging issue right across Canada, we’re working to 
address that. We’re including a pilot project to assist at-risk 
youth in schools, is being funded along with additional 
positions in eight communities. These are to name only a few of 
the health budget highlights as we move forward. 
 
Education. While staying on track, our government has also 
made significant investments in education, Mr. Speaker. The 
Minister of Education states that the school board trustees are 
happy to see an increase in funding for education for a total of 



April 18, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3929 

1.87 billion. This will enable school divisions to hire up to 400 
teachers and other support to help in the classroom, which is an 
increasing tax on the education system as I meet with children 
and also a trustee.  
 
[14:45] 
 
Each school division identifies their greatest needs and targets 
their funding to those areas. We’ve given the trustees more 
autonomy, which, when I’ve talked to the trustees I know, that’s 
what they’re asking for is more freedom to do the funding. 
Because they are at the front line, Mr. Speaker, the school 
trustees, the teachers, and the support staff, they know where 
the money can best be directed. So we’re trying to provide as 
much autonomy as we possibly can as we work forward with 
this, because we know that this has to be done in partnership 
with all the stakeholders involved. Because when it comes to 
children, those are our most important future as we move 
forward. 
 
This budget also has an increase of 30 million in education 
funding, but we will continue to meet with teachers and trustees 
and parents because this is ongoing as we move forward. It’s 
something we have to work together with, and I know that our 
minister is willing to meet with as many trustees and school 
divisions as possible. In fact, I know I have some meetings 
coming up in the near future with divisions in my constituency. 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, the school divisions receive 1.87 
billion in school operating fund and 418 million for teacher 
benefits and benefits. 
 
As we move forward in this budget, I move into highways and 
infrastructure, which in my constituency is probably what I get 
the most calls on. Especially being spring, as we move forward, 
a lot of our highways are getting . . . especially the wet and cold 
spring that we have, especially this spring. But as we move 
forward, Mr. Speaker, highways are always an issue. They’ve 
been an issue ever since I can remember as a kid. But we’re 
addressing the problem the best way we can and throwing . . . 
Every year we actually put more money into highways. We’ve 
made it a huge priority. 
 
I can remember when I first got elected, and that’s probably the 
reason that I got elected in ’99, was the shape of the highways. 
And I know the members opposite get mad when we go back to 
that, but I’ll tell you what. That was an issue in the ’90s. They 
did not put a lot of money into highways. The TMS [thin 
membrane surface] were basically being destroyed. And I know 
that when I went door to door in every little town I was at, that 
was always the discussion in ’99. Whether the members 
opposite, you know, want to yell from their seats on it or not, 
that’s up to them, but that’s what I heard in ’99. 
 
We knew that it always is going to be an ongoing issue as you 
move forward. I mean with this province, the size of it and the 
amount of grain that we have moving up and down, of product 
as more things are moved by truck, as the trucks get bigger and 
there’s just more, even on our secondary highways now you 
meet a lot of truck traffic. And also other traffic: motorhomes 
going to such of the big places as Diefenbaker in my 
constituency, the lakes and the tourist areas. A lot of traffic as 
we move forward. So we’ve made highways a priority. 
 

Major safety improvements are coming to some of the busy 
highways. We’re putting 924 million, going forward, towards 
the highways and infrastructure budget. Approximately 51 
million is going to be invested in major safety programs. Some 
of these projects include: continuing work on the Warman and 
Martensville interchanges; continuing work on twinning 
Highway No. 7 between Vanscoy and Delisle; in my 
constituency, No. 11, there’s going to be a lot of . . . is doing a 
bunch of work on Aylesbury; we’re doing finishing work on 
Highway No. 42 in my constituency; Highway 15 around 
Semans, they’re doing a bunch of work on that as we move 
forward. And we’re working every year to put more and more 
where we can towards highways. These are just a few of the 
highlight funding that’s provided. There will be many more 
smaller highway projects that will be started throughout the 
province as money comes in. It’s always . . . If there is extra, 
the Minister of Highways always seems to get his share, which 
is good. 
 
With it there is also 280 kilometres of light treatment, seal 
coats; 140 kilometres of medium paving, microsurfacing; 280 
kilometres of full repaving on various highways across the 
province. There is also 330 million for continued work on the 
phase 2 of the Regina bypass. 
 
I know the member, in question period, had mentioned that 
safety is important. Then he mentioned saving taxpayers’ 
money is important. Well if I could pick the two, it wouldn’t 
even be close; it’s saving lives. I don’t know how many lives 
have been saved by that interchange or that bypass, but I think 
there’s been a few and there will be a few in the future. To me 
that’s more important than a little bit of debt. 
 
We will also allocate 21 million to support the municipal 
transportation programs that we’re working with the regional 
highway committees that are spread out through the 
constituencies. I remember going to many meetings and getting 
their input and finding out from the RMs [rural municipality] 
where the best highway traffic . . . where we can best direct the 
highway traffic and best direct the money so that we get full use 
of our money on the highways. 
 
I know that we’ve signed this over the years on Skudesnes 
Road, which we provided funding two years ago to get the 
semis off of Highway 44 to go to the terminal at Loreburn. And 
we’ve worked with the RMs as we worked forward if we can 
sign more agreements with them. And I know the minister has 
been working with that and that’s been a very good program to 
work. If we can get as much as we can onto certain highway or 
grid paths and keep that traffic on there, then it’s easier to 
maintain than having a bunch of small networks spread out. So 
those are some of the initiatives that we’re working for. 
 
As you know, we also have the third-lowest debt-to-GDP ratio 
in this country. We have manageable debt and we have an AAA 
credit rating, the second highest of all provinces. 
 
We also enjoy one of the lowest unemployment rates in Canada. 
We have the fastest growth and our population’s increased by 
160,000 in this last decade. When I first ran, that was the 
biggest issue on top of highways, was the people leaving. So 
obviously what we’re doing is working. There’s always more to 
do. There’s always that. But I’ll tell you what, Mr. Speaker. 



3930 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2018 

That tells me we’re on the right track when you look at them 
and you look at the people that are coming, that are wanting to 
move to Saskatchewan. That tells me that the name of this 
budget is the right way, is on the right track. 
 
You know, the NDP ask questions after questions for more and 
more funding, but then again voice their displeasure at any tax 
increases or other measures aimed at providing funding and 
balancing the budget. I know when we were in opposition, we 
provided solutions. We did not just complain just for the sake of 
it. And I know that in my constituency I’ve heard this a few 
times from my constituents. They actually call the opposition 
unserious because they just seem to be just on one thing. It’s 
just whatever we do is wrong. You know, I think they need to 
provide more substance, more ideas as they work forward 
instead of just saying what we’re doing is wrong. Obviously 
with some of the things I’ve stated, we are doing the right 
things and working in the right direction as we move forward in 
our constituency. 
 
You know, we have a plan to control spending and also with 
that to deliver high-quality services for Saskatchewan people. 
The plan is not to increase taxes where it can be helped. We 
also have to balance that with providing high-quality services. 
The two go hand in hand, and that’s part of being a government. 
When I was in the municipal sector, same thing. We had that 
balance of providing services and also trying to keep taxes low. 
That were the two . . . two always went hand in hand. And 
that’s something that our government has been very good at 
doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, and one of the other things when I’m out and about 
in my constituency is the carbon tax. I haven’t heard one person 
in my constituency in favour of it. Not one. This is an issue that 
they feel that it’s just a straight tax that is just going to Ottawa 
and it’s not the right way to work with climate change. You 
know, we have an in-province plan for that. And as we move 
forward in the future, I mean this is something that we need to 
be developing. It’s not to just basically I see almost from the 
left side of the political structure of just banning oil, not 
working to create a solution. And I think we are. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I want to thank you for allowing me 
to enter this important debate. I will be supporting the main 
motion by our Finance minister, and I cannot support the 
amendment put forth by the NDP. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and thank you to all members that have participated in this, 
what I think is a very important debate here in this House as we 
proceed on our three-year plan to balance here, Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the people in the province of Saskatchewan. And this 
year’s budget keeps us on track to that plan to balance, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And we will make every effort throughout the year to adhere to 
our spending initiatives that we have, all the while investing on 
behalf of the people of this province, investing in those services 
that the people of Saskatchewan expect their provincial 
government to invest in, Mr. Speaker. And we will continue to 
work with them, whether it be municipalities, whether it be 

individuals, whether it be families, whether it be our 
community-based organizations, whoever that may be, Mr. 
Speaker. We will continue to work with them to represent them 
in the best way that we are able. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as customary, I would like to just make a few 
personal comments prior to going into a little more of the meat 
and potatoes, if you will, of the budget that was presented here 
the other day. 
 
And the first acknowledgment that I want to make, Mr. 
Speaker, is to my friend, the Minister of Finance, the MLA for 
the community of Humboldt, and all that she has been through 
the last couple of weeks and the last number of months in the 
formulation of this budget, and most particularly the last couple 
of weeks as she stands in support of all of the members that 
were affected by such a tragic accident in our province. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to acknowledge her for everything she’s done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as customary, I do want to acknowledge my 
constituency assistant, Mrs. Sally Fitch that, as I always say in 
this Assembly, thankfully is the eyes, ears, and most thankfully 
the face of Rosthern-Shellbrook in our office, Mr. Speaker. And 
I haven’t gotten there as much as I’m used to the last couple of 
months. I have been home a few times but not as much as I 
have been used to in the years past, Mr. Speaker. So I thank her 
for the effort that she makes and the graceful nature and the 
efficient manner in which she works with all of the constituents 
that reach out to our constituency office, Mr. Speaker. And she 
represents not only myself but the Government of 
Saskatchewan and this Assembly very well to our constituents 
in Rosthern-Shellbrook and now a few from outside that seem 
to be contacting our office from time to time, Mr. Speaker. But 
she does a great job and I thank her for the effort that she brings 
each and every day. 
 
I also want to thank the staff in our office here in this building, 
Mr. Speaker: Ruth Gaura who’s recently retired and has been 
here for decades in the Government of Saskatchewan in some 
capacity; Rhonda Romanuk, Mr. Speaker; as well as Launa in 
our office, who has recently moved into our office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they treat the Premier’s office with the respect and 
honour that it deserves, regardless of the inhabitant who’s 
inhabiting it at that point in time, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 
them for that, and I thank them for continually reminding 
myself as well as others that this is the office of a position, not 
of a person, Mr. Speaker. And it’s an office, a respectful office 
of a position that represents the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I thank them. I thank them 
for showing up each and every day with a smile on their face 
and reminding me why we’re here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last but certainly not least, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank Brad 
Wall for the capacity that he has built over the years in this 
building on the staff side, in all of our ministers’ offices, in the 
caucus office, in Executive Council as well as throughout the 
ministries, and has attracted I think some of the best and 
brightest minds of our province to work on behalf of this 
Legislative Assembly, on behalf of the members on both sides 
of this House, and has at times created maybe some spirited 
debate in this House from time to time, Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 18, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3931 

But I think it’s fair to say that he has represented the people of 
this province earnestly. He’s represented them in good faith, 
Mr. Speaker, and he’s represented them to the very best of his 
ability. And I think he’s provided good leadership for our party, 
Mr. Speaker, but also for the people in this great province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And I would like to thank him not only for the efforts that he 
had made on the party side, but on the staff side in this building 
and the volunteers across the province of Saskatchewan as 
people wanted to be involved, Mr. Speaker, but for the 
attractive nature that he has provided. So that all of these people 
here, Mr. Speaker, that I have the honour of standing with and 
serving with, including yourself, Mr. Speaker, have been 
attracted to run for this party and represent constituents and 
people and families from across the province of Saskatchewan 
in this Assembly, which is truly the greatest honour. And he 
alluded to it many times, about the greatest honour for each and 
every one of us to have in our careers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to thank him for the leadership that he has provided 
our party, our province, and all of the people in this great 
province of Saskatchewan over the last 10 years. And I wish 
him all the best in everything that him and Tami choose, and his 
family, in the years ahead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to this budget that was presented in 
this Chamber last week, as I said, it’s a strong budget as we are 
on track on our plan to balance, with a $365 million deficit in 
the year, proceeding to a $6 million surplus next year, Mr. 
Speaker. And as I said, it’s a budget that keeps us on track and 
it’s a budget that continues to invest in those very services: 
health care, social services, our communities’ most vulnerable. 
It invests in education, all the while giving us the opportunity, 
giving our economy the opportunity to flourish here, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And it’s a budget I think members on this side are happy to 
present in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a budget that I 
personally, as Premier and leader of this province, Mr. Speaker, 
am proud to present to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And here’s why: two and a half per cent increase 
to health care in this budget, Mr. Speaker. $5.77 billion, Mr. 
Speaker, invested in our health care services across the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It isn’t that long ago, Mr. Speaker, that we were out travelling 
the world. The reason for the creation of Saskdocs, the reason 
for the investment in our College of Medicine and in our nurse 
training seats here in the province of Saskatchewan is because 
we didn’t have the services available that the people of this 
province wanted, Mr. Speaker. We didn’t have them available 
in rural Saskatchewan and we didn’t have them available in 
urban Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And it’s through ample 
investment over a number of years.  
 
And I think of the Health ministers that have been involved in 
that over the last decade: the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone; the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy; and 
most recently we had the member from Biggar; the member 
from Lloydminster — the previous member from Lloydminster; 

and now the very competent leadership on the file from the 
member, our Minister of Rural and Remote Health from the 
community of Yorkton; and last but not least, Mr. Speaker, the 
member from Rosetown, my friend, our current Minister of 
Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this looks like is investment, but also 
innovation. And we’ve had the opportunity in this House to talk 
about our surgical wait time initiative and some of the lower . . . 
bringing our wait list times here in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
from some of the longest times in the nation of Canada. Some 
of the longest wait list times were here in Saskatchewan just 
over a decade ago. Mr. Speaker, today we are among the 
shortest wait list times in the nation of Canada. 
 
And that has come about through a commitment to investment 
but also a commitment to innovation and looking at our system 
differently and providing those services, those private services, 
Mr. Speaker, with one lineup. One public lineup, Mr. Speaker. 
And it’s proved well in the wait time, in our surgical wait time 
initiative that I think has been successful here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I look forward to similar innovative 
initiatives being put forward in the months and years ahead, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I point to the amalgamation of our health regions, Mr. Speaker; 
$19 million savings just this year that can be reinvested in 
health care services in communities across the province of 
Saskatchewan. This is new. This is a new initiative. It has 
happened. We have had the opportunity to learn from other 
provinces, and we took that opportunity, Mr. Speaker, and we 
implemented that change here in our health system. And I 
would say that it has done well, not just in the way of savings, 
but also in the delivery of service. 
 
And I talked to individuals that responded just a couple of 
weeks ago to this tragic accident in the province of 
Saskatchewan and how the STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue 
Society] air ambulance as well as our provincial air ambulance 
. . . and actually I believe there was an air ambulance that was 
requested and came in from the province of Alberta to help out 
that evening, Mr. Speaker. And it was all . . . I won’t say 
seamless. I won’t say seamless at all. But it worked very well, 
as we had one organizing body for all of this information to go 
through. And I would be remiss if I did not acknowledge, on 
that very same evening, the heroic efforts of all of those that 
showed up in health care facilities across this province on a 
moment’s notice, Mr. Speaker, to tend to our friends and 
neighbours who were affected in this tragedy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that health care investment, it includes a number 
of things that have been asked for in this Assembly. But I would 
also put forward they’ve been asked for by people across the 
province, you know, investments in capital infrastructure across 
this great province, Mr. Speaker. And there’s been 15 new 
long-term care facilities which have been mentioned hundreds 
of times in this Assembly and maybe even in a news release or 
two on behalf of the government. 
 
But one of those health care facilities is in the community 
where I live, Mr. Speaker, in the Parkland integrated facility in 
the community of Shellbrook. And it’s appreciated by the 
residents that are in it, which is most important. It’s appreciated 



3932 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2018 

by the staff. And I know this very same appreciation is 
occurring in 14 other rural communities across the province. 
 
We have a new hospital, a new Saskatchewan Hospital, an 
integrated hospital in North Battleford, Mr. Speaker. An over 
100-year-old facility was replaced finally by the Government of 
Saskatchewan, a very necessary investment, one that was 
recognized, not just by the community but by people across the 
province of Saskatchewan. And it’s such a necessary 
investment that was provided on behalf of those people by this 
government. 
 
We have a new hospital in Moose Jaw. I had the opportunity to 
visit that hospital a few months ago, Mr. Speaker. A beautiful 
facility it is and a busy facility it is, with people coming and 
going within that hospital, family members visiting their loved 
ones, and a very necessary piece of infrastructure to the great 
community of Moose Jaw. 
 
And we have, last but not least, the investment in the Jim 
Pattison Children’s Hospital in Saskatoon, of which I look 
forward to the opening. I look forward to the services that can 
be provided by that facility and the individuals serving in that 
facility, Mr. Speaker, as it begins . . . as it comes online. The 
children’s hospital would not be necessary . . . would not be 
able to be operational, Mr. Speaker, as there’s no children’s 
hospital in this nation that isn’t closely associated and affiliated 
with a college of medicine. Mr. Speaker, members opposite and 
the Leader of the Opposition I think is, you know, has a great 
affinity for our University of Saskatchewan, as I do, as well as 
our College of Medicine, as I do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When I ran for this position in 2011, we were short of 
physicians and we were short of health care professionals at that 
point in time, Mr. Speaker, and we had to change. We had to 
change how we brought physicians in from around the world. 
And I remember conversations with the Rural and Remote 
Health minister of the day, the member from Biggar. I 
remember conversations with the Health minister, the member 
. . . the previous Health minister, the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone, about specific to how we can recruit and retain 
these medical professionals — nurses, physicians, nurse 
practitioners, whatever we could find — into, I know in my 
constituency, a couple of communities. But across this 
province, I know there’s communities that were short of those 
medical professionals, and thereby there was individuals and 
people that were short of the access that they deserve, Mr. 
Speaker. Now this investment that is continued in this budget 
has allowed us to recruit, retain, train, now have working in this 
province over 750 more physicians in communities right across 
this province. 
 
Some of those in the Jim Pattison Children’s Hospital will be 
there to work there, Mr. Speaker. But some of those are in my 
community. Some of those are in rural communities across this 
great province servicing infrastructure like the Humboldt 
Hospital, Mr. Speaker, servicing infrastructure like the Tisdale 
and Nipawin hospitals that were so overutilized on this tragic 
night less than two weeks ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In addition to that, in addition to those 750 physicians across 
this great province providing services to all of the people that 
we represent in this facility, there are 3,400 more nurses 

working in those very same health care facilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is in contrast, this is in stark contrast to a government that 
is satisfied to stay stagnant for some seven decades in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. The contrast is this: over the five years 
previous to this government, to a Saskatchewan Party 
government here in the province of Saskatchewan, we lost 450 
nurses, Mr. Speaker. We lost 173 doctors. And I can talk about 
the 52 hospitals, but I won’t, Mr. Speaker. I won’t talk about 
those, Mr. Speaker. But we were losing, we were losing 
medical professionals in our communities across this province, 
and it was starting to show up. It was starting to show up in the 
lack of access to those individuals in communities that I now 
represent. 
 
So we took action in the way of changing how we bring these 
physicians in, Mr. Speaker, from around the world. But we also 
took action in the investment in our College of Medicine at the 
University of Saskatchewan. We took our seats from 60 to 100. 
We took our medical residency seats from 60 to 120 to ensure 
that we were training our best and brightest minds right here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we converted Saskdocs to not only recruit our medical 
professionals from around the world, but to look right into our 
College of Medicine and retain and attract those individuals into 
our communities here in the province of Saskatchewan. And the 
graduate retention program doesn’t hurt neither as we keep 
them around. And that is how we have invested, Mr. Speaker, in 
medical professionals in our communities and invested in the 
future of our communities . . . [inaudible]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is many things that were asked for across the 
Assembly here with respect to education. It was asked for more 
investment in education. There’s $30 million in this year’s 
budget, Mr. Speaker — a commitment that I made as I travelled 
this province over the last number of years. But I made that 
commitment after talking to multiple educational professionals 
across this province. Some of them are intricately related to me, 
Mr. Speaker, and they told me very loudly what was needed 
 
But there’s a number of teachers and educational assistants and 
board members that I talked to across this province. I know 
some other members that were traveling; I talked to them as 
well. It was investment that was needed and it was investment 
that was needed right in our front lines of the classroom, Mr. 
Speaker, to ensure that each and every individual in those 
classrooms, our next generation — your children, my children, 
and all of our province’s children — have every opportunity to 
get the education that they deserve and succeed in whatever 
they choose, Mr. Speaker. This is investment that is needed. It’s 
investment that’s added to our investment here in the province 
of Saskatchewan that is somewhat about double what it was 
from 10 years previous. 
 
Never mind, Mr. Speaker, you add to that the 40 new schools 
that have been built. I think 18 opened this last year in our two 
largest urban centres or there close by with Warman and 
Martensville being added to it. This is unprecedented 
investment. This is unprecedented investment in our next 
generation, in our kids of this province, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
going to give them every opportunity to succeed and to 
continue with the success that we’ve enjoyed the last decade in 



April 18, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3933 

our great province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also heard as I travelled the province about the 
investments required in health care, the investments required in 
education. I also heard about the investments required in our 
communities’ most vulnerable across the province. And this 
year, Mr. Speaker, our social services and assistance will 
increase by some $25 million to $1.38 billion in the province of 
Saskatchewan invested in our communities’ most vulnerable. 
 
And I would make note of the funding increase to our 
community-based organizations, Mr. Speaker, in particular in 
the family services and those offering support to our families in 
the province but also to the disability community in our 
province, Mr. Speaker. And I saw . . . I had seen as well over 
the last number of years where this investment goes. And just 
last Saturday, I was in the community of Spiritwood to follow 
up on an event that I attended there in 2012. In 2012 we opened 
a group home in Spiritwood, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to open 
one in La Ronge with this budget, and I would encourage the 
member from Cumberland to have a look at possibly supporting 
that when he has the opportunity. But we opened one in 
Spiritwood in 2012, Mr. Speaker. It was operated by Prairie 
Community Endeavours, a great, for all intents and purposes, 
group of volunteers that came together in that community over 
a decade ago and have been advocating for those with 
intellectual disabilities in that community. And we were happy 
to fund that group home in 2012. 
 
I was back there this past Saturday, Mr. Speaker, as there was 
funding provided to open, renovate, open and add an addition 
on to a building to expand their day program, Mr. Speaker, in 
that community. And there’s a genuine appreciation from not 
only those that are attending, as they have some more room 
now, they have some rooms to conduct, you know, a number of 
different things. They have a kitchen set up there as well, Mr. 
Speaker, where they, you know, make different things. They 
have a quiet room. They have a quiet room, Mr. Speaker, that 
was, you know, much needed and didn’t have the opportunity to 
have that before. So it was a great investment I think, and an 
investment that I’m proud to be a part of as the Government of 
Saskatchewan, in those that need it in our communities. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And this was not in our larger urban community. This was in 
the community of Spiritwood of about 1,000 people, Mr. 
Speaker. There was I think seven or eight people that were 
using that day home, and it was so very appreciated — not just 
by those individuals, not just by their families — but it was 
appreciated by the community of Spiritwood and those 
surrounding communities, Mr. Speaker, that work so hard to 
fundraise and to add funds and add efforts and show up and 
help, Mr. Speaker. And that is how our communities are built. 
That is how we provide the services that we do. 
 
And I was so very proud, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 
Minister of Social Services who advocated quite hard for this, 
as did the Minister of Finance as it made its way through, Mr. 
Speaker, to increase this investment on behalf of some of our 
community’s most vulnerable, to ensure that those 
community-based organizations, community-based 
organizations like Prairie Community Endeavours have the 

funding available, Mr. Speaker, to provide the services for those 
individuals in our communities that so rightfully deserve it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, this budget continues to invest in those 
services that the people of the province want their provincial 
government and expect their provincial government to invest in 
— health care and education, Mr. Speaker, in our community’s 
most vulnerable. But it also provides us the opportunity to grow 
our economy, which is the other side, Mr. Speaker, the 
economic side of government, providing that opportunity for 
businesses to flourish here in the province of Saskatchewan, 
businesses that hire people in communities across this great 
province, whether it’s in Frontier, whether it’s in St. Brieux, or 
whether it’s in our urban centres of Saskatoon, Regina, Prince 
Albert, Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, and so on across this 
province. And we have done that. 
 
It is no secret how we expand the economy in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We’re an export-based economy. We export 
stuff to some 150-plus countries all around the world. This is 
what we do, Mr. Speaker. As we have opportunities to climb 
that value chain, we’re able to climb the value of those exports. 
And this is how we’ve grown the last decade, make no bones 
about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 10 years ago we had exports in this province of 
about $16 billion. We’ve increased that to a high of about 32. I 
think we’ve backed off to about 28 or so this past year due to 
the price of oil, the price of potash. The price of some of our 
natural resources has slipped, which ultimately is the 
conversation around our budgets the last couple of years, Mr. 
Speaker, as our revenue lines are down along with those 
corporations and those natural resource corporations in the 
province. 
 
But this is how we grow our economy, Mr. Speaker. And we 
have grown it over the last decade, some 65 per cent. When we 
do that we create jobs right across this province, as I mentioned. 
As we create those jobs it gives us the opportunity as a province 
to attract people to move here from countries all around the 
world, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve seen that. In our communities, 
Regina, the community of Spiritwood, where Prairie 
Community Endeavours is operating, has 70 people from the 
Filipino community that live and work in that community, Mr. 
Speaker, of 1,000 people. Our communities across this province 
are very, very reflective of that immigration that we have 
enjoyed over the last decade, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’re going to do more, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to do 
more, creating jobs with our industries here in the province of 
Saskatchewan and attracting people to move here from all over 
the world. Just as important as that, Mr. Speaker, we are going 
to provide those very same jobs, those very same careers, the 
very same opportunity to educate themselves for those careers 
to that next generation, to our children here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, so that they have the opportunity to stay in this 
province, to have a career in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
hopefully in a community of their choice, maybe the 
community where they grew up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And for 70 long years under the members opposite and 
left-of-centre governments in this province, Mr. Speaker, that 
opportunity was never there, as our greatest export in this 



3934 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2018 

province wasn’t grain. It wasn’t wheat. It wasn’t pulse crops. It 
wasn’t potash. It wasn’t energy. It was our kids. It was our kids, 
Mr. Speaker. It was our kids that were leaving for Alberta and 
other areas around the world. 
 
I graduated high school in 1991, Mr. Speaker, and most of my 
friends, including myself, jumped on a plane out of here the 
very next day. One-way ticket, Mr. Speaker, to Yellowknife, 
Northwest Territories. Most of my friends, some of them, have 
come back, Mr. Speaker, but many have continued on with their 
careers. And some of the best and brightest in other provinces 
of this nation, Mr. Speaker, and we’re bringing our kids home. 
We’re bringing our kids home. 
 
We’re going to do it through continuing to expand our 
investment in creating those export markets, Mr. Speaker, 
expanding our investment into the Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership. A small amount, Mr. Speaker, but an 
effective organization that is part of that 65 per cent increase in 
exports here in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we introduced the Saskatchewan Technology 
Start-up Incentive, Mr. Speaker, a 45 per cent incentive to boost 
that business, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Innovation is 
actively out talking to this sector, Mr. Speaker, and all of these 
individuals, to ensure they have every opportunity to not only 
start their business here, Mr. Speaker, get to the incubation 
stage, but actually to continue on employing people in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last but not least, we need to always remember 
what our strengths are. And as I said, we export items — 
manufactured goods, mining goods, agricultural goods, Mr. 
Speaker, energy products — all around the world. This is what 
we do. 
 
So a 15 per cent incentive on our value-added agriculture 
industries here in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
not only has the opportunity to provide those direct jobs and 
those plants that we’re able to attract . . . And we have many of 
them in the canola crush as well as the pulse industry here in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. But not only those direct jobs, but this 
allows our ag industry to start to climb that value chain, Mr. 
Speaker, start to push those exports that I talked about, 
increasing some 65 per cent to $30 billion to hit 35, Mr. 
Speaker, to hit 40, to hit 45, Mr. Speaker, and create those jobs 
that attract those people from all around the world and ensure 
that our children have every opportunity to succeed in the next 
generation. And the best thing about it all, Mr. Speaker, is they 
won’t have a burgeoning debt, due to prudent decisions made 
today by this government, Mr. Speaker, and they won’t have a 
carbon tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue. We will continue to advocate on 
behalf of our economy and the expansion of our economy, the 
expansion of our exports, Mr. Speaker, and every opportunity 
that we can to create jobs in our communities across this 
province, Mr. Speaker. The question in question period today 
with respect to grain transportation was relevant, as we are 
challenged again this year with getting our products to market, 
Mr. Speaker. We’ve been challenged a number, twice in the last 
four years on getting those products to market, Mr. Speaker, in 
agriculture. 

We now have oil products on our rail lines, Mr. Speaker, when 
they belong in a pipeline. They belong in a safe, efficient 
pipeline, Mr. Speaker, a pipeline to a port coast, Mr. Speaker. 
And we have some questions to ask on this. And we’re going to 
ask some more questions in the days ahead on pipelines, Mr. 
Speaker, and on ensuring that we can get our products — our 
energy products, our agricultural products, all of the products 
that we produce here in the province, produce or extract here in 
the province of Saskatchewan — to that port position. 
 
And I’ve made some comments over the last number of days 
with respect to the jurisdiction of the federal government over 
our rail lines, Mr. Speaker, and it holds true with respect to 
dealing with CP and CN, Mr. Speaker. But they also have 
jurisdiction over our pipelines here in the nation. And I agree 
with the member opposite, the Leader of the Opposition, when 
he says that our federal government should step into this space 
and provide some leadership, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 
Trans Mountain pipeline, the Kinder Morgan pipeline, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And we are willing to do what it takes to ensure the start and 
the construction of that pipeline, Mr. Speaker, to get that energy 
product in that pipeline, Mr. Speaker, to get it off the rail so that 
we can get our agriculture, our potash, our lumber products on 
the rail, Mr. Speaker. If we are to continue to grow our 
economy, we need access to those ports, Mr. Speaker. We need 
access to that tidewater. We need access to those some 150 
countries that we want to export products to each and every 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and there are some questions that the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan are starting to ask. And they’re 
starting to ask the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, what is their 
position on Trans Mountain? We’ve seen in this House, Mr. 
Speaker, they seem lukewarm positive or supportive of the 
construction of the Trans Mountain pipeline. They feel that the 
federal government should step in and provide leadership. 
 
I agree with all that, Mr. Speaker, but there is some ambiguity 
when we get out to the rotunda, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
actually taking action to stand up for Saskatchewan industry, 
Saskatchewan jobs, and Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker, in 
doing what is necessary to ensure the expedient start of that 
pipeline. 
 
And I wondered to myself, I said, why are they unclear on this, 
Mr. Speaker? Why is the Leader of the Opposition unclear on 
this pipeline that is so important to narrowing that differential 
gap and increasing the value of our products that we can export 
out of our province, Mr. Speaker, as we’re exporting at about a 
$2.6 billion a year discount due to the oil price differential? 
This pipeline will start to narrow that, Mr. Speaker, and start to 
add to the economy of the province of Saskatchewan. And it’s a 
bump that we can most certainly use, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I asked myself, I asked myself, why could anyone be unclear 
on our province’s position with respect to this? But I found 
some clues, Mr. Speaker. I found a few clues. During the last 
election campaign, the 2016 election campaign, all of us in this 
House, we took donations, Mr. Speaker, from a number of 
different individuals, corporations, unions, across the province, 
Mr. Speaker, some outside of the province, Mr. Speaker. But 



April 18, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3935 

the fact of the matter is — and this may be a clue to the 
ambiguity on standing up for Saskatchewan people and trying 
to ensure the construction of that Trans Mountain pipeline, Mr. 
Speaker — is the members opposite, the Saskatchewan NDP 
accepted a $7,500 donation from John Horgan and the BC 
[British Columbia] NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the question, the question that the people of the province 
have, Mr. Speaker, is that Leader of the Opposition, are those 
members over there beholden to John Horgan in his position on 
shutting down energy transport from the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? That was my first clue. That was 
my first clue, Mr. Speaker. Are the Saskatchewan NDP really 
under the wing of John Horgan and the BC NDP when it comes 
to the transport of our products to an export position? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other day a senior staff member in the caucus 
office of the NDP, they tweeted — I call it Twitter but I’m 
corrected all the time; you don’t Twitter, you tweet, Mr. 
Speaker — he tweeted, and I quote, “There is a strong business 
case against Kinder Morgan,” and with this hashtag, 
#stopkindermorgan, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that’s a senior 
member in the caucus office of the NDP, and it’s disturbing to 
the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And to me it was another clue. It’s another clue why the 
members opposite won’t go out to the rotunda, Mr. Speaker, 
and stand up for our industries, stand up to ensure that our 
national government, our Prime Minister lead on this file, and 
ensure the construction of that project supporting all of the 
industries here in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And last but not least was one last . . . [inaudible] . . . Mr. 
Speaker. A short while ago, Mr. Speaker, there was a federal 
NDP leadership campaign. I didn’t follow it very closely, but 
others did, a few people. A few people, Mr. Speaker, apparently 
one over there. Some of the members over there even 
participated in that federal leadership campaign, Mr. Speaker. 
And there was a . . . One of the candidates running there, Mr. 
Speaker, was an NDP MP [Member of Parliament], I believe 
from Manitoba, if I’m not mistaken, Niki Ashton. And she said 
this, Mr. Speaker, and I quote, “We need to stand united against 
Kinder Morgan.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, as she was fundraising, like many of us were 
during the election, during the leadership election, members on 
that side, Mr. Speaker . . . But the fact of the matter is the 
Leader of the NDP Opposition in Saskatchewan, very quickly 
after that comment was made, within a number of weeks, sent a 
$500 cheque to her leadership campaign, Mr. Speaker. So you 
have the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, accepting money 
from the BC NDP, donating money to the leadership campaign 
of an NDP leadership candidate, Mr. Speaker, all of which want 
to shut down energy products not just in Canada, but more 
specifically in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Which I would put forward, our energy products in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, should be expanded not only across the 
nation of Canada to replace energy products that are coming in 
from areas like Algeria, Venezuela, and Saudi Arabia, Mr. 
Speaker. The energy that we produce is much more ethical and 
it’s produced much more sustainably than those products that 
are imported from around the world, Mr. Speaker. And 

Canadians should use Western Canadian products when it 
comes to energy, and we should get those products to other 
areas of the world if we’re serious in any way, Mr. Speaker, 
about sustainable production from an environmental 
perspective, but also — also, Mr. Speaker — from a human 
perspective. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing . . . That’s all I’ll say about NDP 
leadership races. Mr. Speaker, in closing, this is a budget that I 
am proud, as leader of this party, and Premier of this province, 
I’m proud to stand alongside my colleagues, the Minister of 
Finance and all of the members on this side to put this budget in 
front of the people of the province, Mr. Speaker, as it remains 
. . . it continues on our track to balance, Mr. Speaker. And it 
keeps us on track to ensure that the investments that we have 
enjoyed over the last decade will be there not this year, not just 
this year, not just next year, but for decades into the future, Mr. 
Speaker, for that next generation. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a budget that continues to invest in the 
services the people of this province expect such as health care, 
such as education, such as investing in our communities’ most 
vulnerable, Mr. Speaker, and investing in every opportunity for 
our economy to grow and expand so that we can have 
everything we’ve had the last decade and more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will continue as Premier of this province, Mr. Speaker, to 
stand by each of my colleagues and stand for the people in the 
communities and the families across this province in whatever 
way is called on me, Mr. Speaker. I give that to each and every 
member of this province today, and I will stand for this budget, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m happy to say I will not be supporting the amendment that 
was put forward by the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. But I 
will proudly be supporting this budget that was tabled in this 
Assembly by the Minister of Finance, the MLA for Humboldt, 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — It is my duty pursuant to rule 31(7) to warn 
the Assembly that the minister’s about to exercise her right to 
close the debate, and afterwards all members will be precluded 
from speaking to this question. Therefore, if any member 
wishes to speak, let him or her do so now. I recognize the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I too 
have a number of thank yous to give to so many people in this 
province and this Assembly and in the building. 
 
I want to begin of course by thanking my three daughters: 
Crystal, Shannon, and Lindsay; and my son-in-law Rusty, 
Shannon’s partner, Brian. And we had, of course, the four new 
adorable little people that are part of my life here in the 
Assembly on budget day: Makenna, Emryk, Lucas, and James. 
 
Emryk now likes watching the Grandma Donna show. He really 
needs a life. So he sits there and watches the legislature channel 
and that has become his new Grandma Donna show. And he 
even watches when it’s scrolling the pictures looking for 
Grandma Donna’s picture. So he’s figured out the green 



3936 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2018 

underneath is the green team, and she’s on the green team, and 
then there’s the orange team. And it’s quite comical because 
he’ll sit there for about 20 minutes. It’s taken over PAW Patrol. 
 
You know, I also have to say a huge thank you for my fiancé, 
Tom. He’s the most tolerant, patient man ever. Obviously I’m 
not home a lot and he is very tolerant of that and very, very 
supportive of what I do. 
 
I want to say thank you to my staff in my office, my chief of 
staff, Stacey. I have Nicole, Dane, Brendan, and Carla. They 
work very hard. We are all new to the Finance portfolio so this 
was a full new team putting together a budget for the very first 
time. 
 
I want to thank my constituency assistant, Susan Dunne. She 
works very, very hard for me in the city of Humboldt and for 
the entire constituency of Humboldt-Watrous. And she too has 
had a very tough time this last week and a half because she too 
knows these families and it’s touched her very much. But I have 
to say, Susan Dunne is an exemplary example of how Humboldt 
is strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank all my officials in the Ministry of 
Finance. This of course is my first budget as Finance minister 
and I can’t say how much I appreciate their support, their 
expertise, their knowledge. And I want to thank my Finance 
deputy minister, Rupen Pandya. This also was his first budget, 
so we have a lot of newbies on this team. And you know, he put 
in hours and hours and never once did I feel unsupported at any 
given time, so I thank Rupen so very, very much. 
 
I want to thank all of the members who served on the treasury 
board. This is not the Finance minister’s budget. This is our 
government’s budget, and many people have input into that 
budget. And I had a number of members on treasury board who 
worked hard with me for countless hours, so I thank them. 
 
I want to thank the previous Finance minister, Kevin Doherty. 
Kevin did a lot of heavy lifting. I pointed out in my budget 
speech that it was not easy to shift our reliance on resource 
revenue to consumption. There was difficult decisions that had 
to be made and, Mr. Speaker, Kevin did that and Kevin was 
also supportive of me. Kevin was also impacted by the tragedy 
and he reached out to me immediately. He used to be a Broncos 
player. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say thank you to someone that I’ve 
admired for a lot of years and worked very closely with for my 
entire political career, but he’s intimidating at times, and that’s 
previous Finance minister, Ken Krawetz. So Ken Krawetz has 
been with us as the adviser and he was going to sit on treasury 
board with me. Like that’s a little intimidating and you’ve got 
to wonder like yes, you know, Ken is the previous Finance 
minister; is this going to be a problem? Well I’ll tell you, it was 
not in the least. I could not have been more supported than I 
was from Ken Krawetz. Ken Krawetz has absolutely been a 
pillar for me and he has been happy for the work that I have 
done. And so, Ken Krawetz, I can’t say thank you enough. 
 
I want to thank the members on both sides of the House. Of 
course, the members on the government side of the House for 
their co-operation and hard work through the whole budget 

process, but both sides of the House for the support that they’ve 
given me over the tragic situation. Many were at the vigil on 
both sides of the House, but that was the day there was no, no 
division, no division at all, and so I thank you all for that. The 
caucus colleagues have been tremendous. 
 
I’d like to thank the staff in the building. They too have been a 
tremendous support, many of them who worked with me 
because I’ve had so many portfolios. But you know, they 
always tease me that they’ll do what I ask because they’re 
scared of me, but I know that’s not true. I know they really do 
care. Yes, they do. Each and every day, you know, I feel so 
supported in this building, and now in the last week and a half, 
more than ever before. I appreciate the staff that we have in this 
building. 
 
I’d like to thank the former premier, Brad Wall, for having the 
confidence to appoint me as the Minister of Finance. And of 
course I want to thank the new Premier who decided not to 
change that. But he has worked tirelessly, along with myself 
and the members of treasury board and caucus, to help prepare 
for this budget. But also I cannot thank the Premier for the 
support that I had this past week, not as a premier, not as a 
colleague, as a friend, and that means everything to me. 
 
Lastly I want to thank the community of Humboldt. As the 
MLA from Humboldt, it’s been an honour to serve as their 
representative here in this Assembly. And as I’ve said over the 
past week and a half, I have been absolutely amazed and quite 
frankly inspired by the strength that is in my community. The 
compassion that’s been shown from both within the community 
of Humboldt, but from around the province and the country and 
the world is what keeps our communities and families strong. 
So thank you to everyone for the compassion and thank you for 
your support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I stated a week ago, we have a plan and that 
plan is on track. Over the past week, I’ve been watching and 
listening very carefully for feedback on the budget. The vast 
majority of what I’ve heard is that members of the public are 
satisfied that we have a plan to get back to balance and that plan 
is working. When I provided an update on the third quarter of 
the ’17-18 fiscal year, it was then I felt very confident that we 
were on track and our plan is working. There is no doubt there 
we still have difficult decisions that we need to make as we go 
forward. 
 
But we aren’t here today to discuss last year’s budget and those 
difficult decisions. We’re here to reflect on this budget and 
future decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me great comfort to see the deficit number 
shrink. I am pleased to see the progress that we made and to see 
that we’re able to continue to make increased investments in 
health care, education, in our social safety net services, for the 
people of Saskatchewan. And by the looks of some of the 
reactions to the budget, it’s being well received. 
 
I note CIBC’s [Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce] 
commentary on the provincial budget, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan delivered a budget consistent with its steady 
hand approach to prudent fiscal management, continuing 



April 18, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3937 

the track record of the Saskatchewan Party that has been in 
power since 2007 and that won a third mandate in the 2016 
general election on a campaign pledge of sticking to its 
conservative principles. Today’s budget, the first under 
new Premier Scott Moe, carries on that tradition with a 
firm commitment to get [back] to balance in 2019/20. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve controlled spending in this budget. 
Expenditures are forecast to be down 1.4 per cent, down from 
last year’s budget, helping to further close our current operating 
deficit. Part of controlling expenditures is looking for 
efficiencies. 
 
Another reaction to our budget on that controlled spending was 
Todd MacKay, the Prairie director of the Canadian Taxpayers 
Federation. He said this, and I quote: 
 

I can’t think of any other government in all of Canada 
who’s actually trimming spending. I don’t know if a 
government can actually slay a deficit without trimming 
spending. So when you see the spending numbers coming 
down, it makes you feel good about the future. 

 
And while we’ve been able to limit spending, I was proud that 
this budget contains no increases to tax rates. And that means 
all provincial tax rates including sales tax, personal income tax, 
corporate income tax, education property tax all remain the 
same. 
 
Our government has cumulatively provided nearly $5 billion in 
personal income tax reductions and about $1.4 billion in 
education property tax reductions since we took office in 2007. 
In this budget we’ve maintained the half point of personal 
income tax reduction we announced last year, which saved 
taxpayers $59 million last year and an additional $121 million 
in the 2018 tax year. 
 
To give an illustration of how that affects the people of 
Saskatchewan, a family of four with the combined total of 
$50,000 in income will pay zero income tax over this year. The 
tax reduction we’ve introduced during our time in government 
means that this family is paying $2,300 less in income tax than 
compared in 2007 when the NDP were in power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we formed government over a decade ago, 
we were faced with a massive infrastructure deficit. The 
significant funding we’ve provided has fixed highways, built 
schools, built long-term care facilities and hospitals. I note that 
for the first time ever we will finally have a children’s hospital 
in our province. 
 
In addition, this year the community of North Battleford will 
have a state-of-the-art mental health facility to help those with 
mental health challenges within our province, something the 
members opposite have been calling for. They’ve been calling 
for increased services for mental health and yet when that’s 
provided, they criticize over and over again. 
 
Our government knows that in order to sustain these important 
investments and future investments going forward, we need to 
have a strong economy, Mr. Speaker. We need to have jobs in 
the province and we need to remain open for business. And 
while we can’t control what the federal government does and 

we can’t control what other jurisdictions do, we’re going to 
make absolutely every effort imaginable to ensure that our 
province is a place where our energy resource sectors continue 
to thrive. And we hope the members opposite will join us in 
those efforts as we move forward. 
 
This budget does just that. It continues to support energy sector, 
the tech sector, the businesses within our province, small 
business, large corporations who are continuing to support the 
economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to highlight something referenced in this budget 
document. The Fraser Institute annual survey of mining 
companies named Saskatchewan the best place in Canada and 
the second-best jurisdiction in the world for mining investment, 
based on competitive taxes, regulatory certainty, and permitting 
practices. Mr. Speaker, that’s very significant. It’s hugely 
significant for my constituency. I have a number of potash 
mines, Mr. Speaker. Those potash mines are important to my 
constituency for employment, for the families within the 
constituency. And so it is good that our province is supporting 
that industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note the reaction from John Hopkins, the CEO 
[chief executive officer] of the Regina Chamber who said, and I 
quote, “Very good in terms of stability for the private sector and 
it really sets the message, sets the tone, that we are open for 
business here in Saskatchewan. We want to see continued 
growth here in Saskatchewan.” 
 
[15:45] 
 
I believe that we’ve taken a balanced approach given the fiscal 
situation in the province. We have delivered a budget that keeps 
Saskatchewan on track by controlling spending, by investing in 
people, by investing in infrastructure, and by remaining open 
for business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened to many of the comments made by 
the members opposite, and all of them critical. Even when we 
have the services they asked for, they’re still critical that they 
aren’t enough money, they’re not put in place fast enough, that 
they don’t go far enough or broad enough, even though they far 
exceed the services and programming that their party had in 
place when they were government. 
 
But I’ve never heard a plan from the members opposite. I’ve 
never once heard a plan. They keep saying that we don’t have a 
plan and yet many, many of the financial institutes that examine 
our budget and businesses that have examined our budget have 
noted there’s a plan and that they’re pleased with that plan and 
they feel that plan is on track. The NDP opposite keeps 
reminding us that they don’t think we have a plan. But what’s 
theirs? 
 
They don’t want to see taxes increased, Mr. Speaker. They 
don’t want to see debt increased, Mr. Speaker. But yet they 
want to spend, according to the Leader of the Opposition’s 
platform, an additional two point billion dollars. Mr. Speaker, 
where’s that supposed to come from? Where is it supposed to 
come from? Where do they plan to get the money? There is no 
money tree, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t just magically happen. So 
what is the NDP plan? 



3938 Saskatchewan Hansard April 18, 2018 

I spent a number of years in opposition and I always remember 
the rule of thumb was, we were told from our support staff, 
always have a three-point plan. Unless you’re going to scrap it 
completely and criticize the government — which was the NDP 
of the day — unless you’re going to scrap their idea completely, 
you’d better have a three-point plan because you’re not a 
government in waiting unless you do. That’s telling of the 
members opposite. 
 
They have no plan. They don’t have the alternative. They have 
no idea how they would do things differently. They criticize tax 
changes. They criticize programs because it’s not enough. Not 
enough for education. Not enough for health care. Not enough 
for social safety nets. Not enough for anything or . . . 
Absolutely nothing that we’ve expanded is enough. 
 
I asked the Leader of the Opposition yesterday, how much? One 
of his members was asking questions about Advanced 
Education. So I said, how much? He said, enough. Not a 
number. It’s just not a number in anyone’s world. I can just 
imagine if I asked my three daughters when they were going to 
go out one night, like I’ll give you enough. I can imagine the 
different numbers I would have got before they went out that 
door if they thought they could just be provided with enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have no plan. They have no idea. They 
criticize without an alternative, and that just is not a government 
in waiting. They do not know how they would pay for the 
promises and the suggestions that was made by their leader. 
They do not know what they would do to stimulate the 
economy. I think I heard the Leader of the Opposition say 
something about, we need to just tax the rich. We need to tax 
them more. I’m sure that’s what he said in his speech, that 
we’re taking too many taxes from the lower income level 
people, Mr. Speaker. Does he not realize how many people 
we’ve taken off the tax roll completely? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be interesting when estimates come 
up because I know that there’s going to be a number of 
criticisms that I’m going to hear from the NDP Finance critic. 
But what I’m very interested to hear is, what’s her alternative? 
What’s her plan? I have yet to hear it. You cannot . . . I mean 
it’s just not mathematically possible. And you can’t 
automatically say it’s because of waste because everything they 
have identified that they don’t agree with, they wouldn’t have 
done. 
 
They wouldn’t have done the bypass. They would have just 
allowed the unsafe conditions that was happening on one of our 
busiest highways in our province. They would have just let that 
continue. They wouldn’t have done that, but that’s fair enough. 
That is something they wouldn’t have done. They wouldn’t 
have done the John Black contract, and they wouldn’t have 
bought the GTH [Global Transportation Hub] land. Fair 
enough. That doesn’t add up to $1.3 billion each and every 
year, Mr. Speaker. It’s a shortfall each and every year that we 
need to backfill. How would they do it? How would they do it, 
Mr. Speaker? And I don’t see one single answer coming out of 
those members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, estimates are going to be interesting, and let’s see 
if they are going to now come to committee with a plan. Or 
maybe in the weeks ahead they’ll just offer it up here in the 

Assembly because I know there’s a lot of people just waiting to 
hear what it is, because unless they have a plan they’re not 
taking this seriously. Criticism is not the only job of an 
opposition party. You’ve got to have some suggestions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude my remarks with a quote 
from the Dominion Bond Rating Service’s commentary on this 
budget. And I dare to say, Mr. Speaker, maybe they’re the 
experts that understand the budget a little bit more than the 
members opposite in the NDP party. And that quote is this: 
“Having demonstrated its commitment to responsible fiscal 
policy, DBRS expects the province will be successful in 
balancing the provincial budget in 2019-20.” Mr. Speaker, I’m 
inclined to agree. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has closed debate. Pursuant to 
rule 31(8) it is my duty at this time to put the question on the 
amendment. The question before the Assembly is the proposed 
amendment to the budget motion moved by the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana, seconded by the member from Regina 
Douglas Park, that: 
 

disagrees with the government for tabling a budget that 
fails to make smart investments to grow the economy, 
create jobs, prioritize education, and protect the most 
vulnerable. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion, please say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion, please say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I think the nos have it. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 15:52 until 15:54.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
proposed amendment to the budget motion moved by the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana, seconded by the member from 
Regina Douglas Park, that: 
 

disagrees with the government for tabling a budget that 
fails to make smart investments to grow the economy, 
create jobs, prioritize education, and protect the most 
vulnerable. 

 
All those in favour of the motion please stand. 
 

[Yeas — 12] 
 
Meili Vermette Wotherspoon 
Beck Sproule Forbes 
Rancourt Mowat Sarauer 
McCall Belanger Chartier 



April 18, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 3939 

The Speaker: — All those opposed please stand. 
 

[Nays — 45] 
 
Moe Beaudry-Mellor Merriman 
Stewart Reiter Wyant 
Morgan Harpauer Duncan 
Marit Hargrave D’Autremont 
Cox Heppner Kaeding 
Makowsky Tell Eyre 
Brkich Harrison Ottenbreit 
Cheveldayoff Weekes Hart 
Kirsch Bradshaw Fiaz 
Carr Lawrence Wilson 
McMorris Michelson Bonk 
Doke Steinley Hindley 
Buckingham Lambert Dennis 
Nerlien Steele Tochor 
Goudy Olauson Francis 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the 
amendment, 12; those opposed, 45. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the amendment lost. 
 
So the question before the Assembly is the budget motion 
moved by the Minister of Finance, seconded by the member 
from Canora-Pelly: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion please say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion please say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — I believe the ayes have it. Call in the 
members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 15:59 until 16:00.] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is: 
 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 
policy of the government. 

 
All those in favour of the motion please stand. 
 

[Yeas — 45] 
 
Moe Beaudry-Mellor Merriman 
Stewart Reiter Wyant 
Morgan Harpauer Duncan 

Marit Hargrave D’Autremont 
Cox Heppner Kaeding 
Makowsky Tell Eyre 
Brkich Harrison Ottenbreit 
Cheveldayoff Weekes Hart 
Kirsch Bradshaw Fiaz 
Carr Lawrence Wilson 
McMorris Michelson Bonk 
Doke Steinley Hindley 
Buckingham Lambert Dennis 
Nerlien Steele Tochor 
Goudy Olauson Francis 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed to the motion please stand. 
 

[Nays — 12] 
 
Meili Vermette Wotherspoon 
Beck Sproule Forbes 
Rancourt Mowat Sarauer 
McCall Belanger Chartier 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the budget motion, 
45; those opposed, 12. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 
House do adjourn for the day. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved to 
adjourn debate. This House stands adjourned until . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, sorry. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned until 10 
a.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:03.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3917 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3917 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 3917 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3917 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Goudy ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3917 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Father and Son Recognized at Track and Field Championship 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3917 
 Former Premier Inducted Into Hall of Fame 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3918 
 Regina Philanthropists Win Citizen of the Year Award 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3918 
 Impaired Driving Prevention Campaigns Recognized 
  Hindley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3918 
 Heart and Stroke Foundation Fundraiser 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3919 
 Family Farm Wins Charolais Breeder of the Year Award 
  Dennis ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3919 
 Reesor Ranch Offers Award-Winning Hospitality 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3919 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Determination of Conflict of Interest 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3919 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3920 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3920 
 Recruitment of Staff for Children’s Hospital 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3921 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3921 
 Support for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3921 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 3921 
 Provincial Sales Tax Exemptions 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3922 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3922 
 SaskPower Rates 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3922 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3922 
 Municipal Revenue Sharing 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 3923 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 3923 
 Saskatoon Freeway Project 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 3924 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 3924 
 Rail Transportation Issues 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3924 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 3925 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 3925 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 3928 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 3930 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 3935 
 Recorded Division (Amendment) .............................................................................................................................................. 3938 
 Recorded Division (Main Motion) ............................................................................................................................................. 3939 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


