


















































May 7, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 54A  MONDAY, MAY 7, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4207 
 May 7, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Question Out of Order 
 

The Speaker: — I have a statement concerning a question 
asked on May 3rd, 2018 during question period by the member 
for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
At page 4190 of Hansard the member for Saskatoon Nutana 
asked the Minister of Finance these questions: 
 

Doesn’t she think women can do math . . . as well as men 
can? Will the Finance minister apologize for these 
comments? 

 
Pursuant to rule 20(2) of the Rules and Procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly, a question must be connected to the 
government. Upon review, I find the question is about the 
personal viewpoint of the minister and not connected to the 
government. My concern does not end there. 
 
At page 624 of the House of Commons Procedure and Practice, 
3rd Edition, 2017, it states that the Speaker takes into 
consideration the intention of the member speaking and the 
person to whom the words at issue were directed. I have to ask, 
what was the intention of this question? 
 
Members know all too well, given many, many rulings from the 
Chair, some as recently as a few weeks ago, that remarks which 
question a member’s integrity, honesty, or character are out of 
order. The dictionary defines “character” as the moral qualities 
distinctive to an individual. Previously I asked members to heed 
their own code of ethical conduct, to respect differences and 
treat each other with fairness in political dealings. 
 
In this instance, the question is out of order because it was not 
related to the government. It was also meant to reflect 
personally on the minister, which is also out of order and 
troubling. I ask the member for Saskatoon Nutana to withdraw 
and apologize to the Assembly. I recognize the member of 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I withdraw and I 
apologize. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask 
for leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 
members of this House. And through you, Mr. Speaker, and 
through all members to this House, I want to take a moment this 
morning to introduce to you some very special guests from the 
community of Spiritwood in the constituency of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. And today with us, Mr. Speaker, we have 
Shelley Allard and her daughter Megan. Mr. Speaker, 
accompanying Shelley and Megan is Megan’s aunt, Sister 
Alvina Marie Charlebois from Regina here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Megan is a very special constituent in the 
constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook and a very important 
volunteer in the community of Spiritwood. And when you look 
at Megan’s impressive resumé, you very quickly begin to be 
able to see what a remarkable young woman she is. She is one 
of the most active volunteers in that community, Mr. Speaker, 
and her mom, Shelley, gets to be involved in all of those 
volunteer activities as well. 
 
She has led numerous fundraising initiatives in the community 
through her involvement with the Saskatchewan Association for 
Community Living. While attending Spiritwood High School, 
Megan was the driving force behind the World Down 
Syndrome Day Lots of Socks events that she did for a number 
of years. Mr. Speaker, Lots of Socks encourages people to wear 
brightly coloured socks or long socks or possibly just one sock 
to raise awareness and to express support for those in our 
community who perceive life a little differently. 
 
Megan was involved in the creation of an enterprise called 
Nu-2-U Clothing in Spiritwood, Mr. Speaker. Nu-2-U is now a 
major enterprise that collects clothing and donates it to the 
Saskatchewan Association for Community Living. Megan has 
served as a member of the Saskatchewan Association for 
Community Living’s provincial board of directors. And in 2015 
she was recognized, Mr. Speaker — and I had the honour of 
attending the ceremony — but she was recognized by the 
Lieutenant Governor, Vaughn Solomon Schofield, as a 
Saskatchewan Junior Citizen of the Year. 
 
Since then Megan has been deeply involved with the 
Spiritwood Lions Club, Mr. Speaker, involved in many 
activities in the community. She’s volunteered at two seniors’ 
residences in the community. She was instrumental in securing 
a $3,500 donation to the Spiritwood long-term care home. And 
Megan does all of this while working at the local grocery store 
in the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Megan has had an excellent mentor and an 
excellent role model in her mom, Shelley. For many years 
Shelley has been an enthusiastic volunteer in the community, 
although she concedes it’s tough to keep up to Megan. And I 
agree with that. Shelley and Megan are actively involved in 
Ability in Me, or AIM, Mr. Speaker, an organization in 
Saskatoon that offers specialized therapy and programming to 
support individuals with Down syndrome. And we were just 
talking, Mr. Speaker, of Megan’s new filly that she got two 
weeks ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this evening a number of members will find out 



4208 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2018 

more about AIM at the reception that they are hosting here in 
the legislature, thus our visit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Winston Churchill once said this: “We make a living by what 
we get, but we make a life by what we give.” Shelley and 
Megan Allard have made an impressive life in the community 
of Spiritwood, a life that is most worthy of emulation. We owe 
them our gratitude for the incredible example they have 
provided for all of us here in this great province of 
Saskatchewan.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in welcoming these 
three individuals to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lumsden-Morse. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of this honourable Assembly, I’d 
like to introduce a group of 15 grade 9 to 12 students from 
Lumsden High School, accompanied by their teacher, Daniela 
Machuca, and educational assistants, Lisa Magel, Pat Church, 
and Penny Tompkins, as well as Jenna Ross, who is seated on 
the floor of the legislature with student Khyra Burgess. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very special class called BRIDGES, 
Building Relationships and Inclusion to Drive Goal-Based 
Educational Success. The course brings together students of all 
abilities from regular high school programs and from alternative 
education programming to meet individual and collective goals 
in the areas of life skills, community service, physical 
recreation, and social emotional skills. 
 
This semester there are grade 12 students who act as leaders and 
mentors. The class was envisaged and established by another 
teacher, Heather Winter, who is not able to join us today. Mr. 
Speaker, I hope that all members of this honourable Assembly 
will welcome these guests. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of this honourable 
Assembly, Fred Retzlaff, also seated in your west gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, executive director of AgriStability at Saskatchewan 
Crop Insurance Corporation. Fred has worked for over 40 years 
in the agriculture industry and in banking and delivering risk 
management programs. For the last 10 years, Fred has been 
working with SCIC [Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
Corporation] on the AgriStability program. 
 
Fred was instrumental in transitioning the delivery of 
AgriStability program from the federal government to the 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation. Fred says that when 
AgriStability was delivered by the federal government, one of 
the most significant complaints to his office was about the 
delivery. Since SCIC took over, the number of complaints has 
decreased to almost zero. 
 
I understand that Fred is retiring on May 18th, and I would like 
to congratulate and thank him for his contributions to the 
farmers and ranchers of this province and welcome him to his 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Stonebridge-Dakota. 

Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery, 
I’d like to welcome Anne Gent. Anne is a senior environmental 
scientist with Cameco. She’s also Chair of Women in Mining 
and Women in Nuclear in Saskatchewan. She and I met earlier 
this afternoon; we had a lovely chat. I also discovered she’s a 
constituent. 
 
And Anne has over 17 years’ experience in environmental 
research, consulting, and regulatory compliance within the 
mining industry. She’s active in promoting responsible resource 
development as well as the clean benefits of uranium. She also 
strives to break down stereotypes of the industry and to promote 
STEM [science, technology, engineering, and math] careers, 
particularly for women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Canada’s mining industry, women account for 
17 per cent of the total mining labour force, 19 per cent of the 
labour force in mining, quarrying, and oil and gas extraction. 
But those numbers are growing and as Anne herself said 
recently, “Our goal is to change preconceptions women may 
have of the mining industry and to educate and promote women 
into the mining and mineral sector as the great career choice 
that it is.” 
 
Please join me, Mr. Speaker, in welcoming Anne to her 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Silverspring-Sutherland. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you I’d like to introduce to the Assembly my parents, 
Ted and Marie Merriman, who are seated on the floor. I’m a 
little more nervous about doing this introduction than I am 
about question period, Mr. Speaker, because I don’t want to 
miss anything. 
 
They’ve had a very great career. My father was elected in 2003 
to 2007, sitting with the Saskatchewan Party in opposition, and 
was very pivotal in moving the Saskatchewan Party forward 
and helping them form government under then leader Brad Wall 
and then of course Premier Brad Wall. My mother, she’s the 
heartbeat of our family. She always has been and always will 
be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My dad grew up on the wrong side of the tracks, I’d have to 
say, in Toronto. That was the bad news. He grew up with five 
brothers and one sister in a two-bedroom place in Toronto. The 
good news is he found my mother on the other side of the tracks 
and she brought him up and lifted him up, and they’ve been 
together ever since, Mr. Speaker. They walk hand in hand down 
the street. They have for close to 50 years, Mr. Speaker. Very 
proud of all of their community work that they have done. They 
set up many charities, Care & Share in Saskatoon the most 
notable; but also my dad is a founding board member of AIM 
[Ability in Me], which I see Megan was here to participate in 
the festivities. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome my parents. I love 
you both very much. Thank you for everything you’ve done. 
My sister and I and your five grandchildren thank you for 
everything that you’ve done for your family. So I’d like to 
welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 



May 7, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4209 

Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
would like to join the minister in welcoming Ted Merriman and 
Marie to this House. When Ted was elected in 2003, he was a 
very capable MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly], but 
a very, very capable critic and he kept us hopping. So he is a 
good man and I know he took everything to heart and continues 
to take everything to heart. And we are very fortunate to have 
him here in Saskatchewan.  
 
So I’d ask all members to join me and the opposition in 
welcoming Ted and Marie to their legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I’d 
be remiss if I didn’t stand, Mr. Speaker, and speak about Ted 
and Marie. For the interest of everyone in the House, Ted was 
the one that got me interested in politics, so to the extent that I 
owe any apologies to anybody, they can blame Ted Merriman 
for that. But Ted got me involved in politics, Mr. Speaker, 
many years ago. He convinced me to run as trustee for the 
Saskatoon school board and from there we had some 
conversations about whether I should run for city council and 
then ultimately run for MLA in Saskatoon Northwest, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I have appreciated the support that Ted and Marie have given 
me. Over these many years I’ve learned lots of lessons, Mr. 
Speaker, and I have to thank them very much. So I’d be remiss 
if I didn’t stand up and put on the record, Mr. Speaker, my 
heartfelt thanks to both Ted and Marie for all the support and all 
the encouragement that they’ve given me over these many years 
in politics, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 
to introduce two constituents of Moosomin constituency, Tyler 
Thomlinson and Dale Hardy, sitting in the west gallery. Both of 
them are just stalwarts of the community; both business owners, 
and Tyler’s a pharmacist and Dale’s been in agribusiness for 
years. And they both work tirelessly in the community, 
especially volunteering on sports teams and organizations. And 
I know Dale Hardy’s been involved with the Grenfell Spitfires 
for many years. 
 
And sitting beside him is Mark Schneider, who I believe runs 
the entire Ministry of Highways. And he’s also a proud Spitfire 
alum. 
 
Tyler of course is a councillor in Grenfell and he’s a pharmacist 
there. And he’s been instrumental on my executive as the 
membership Chair. He’s done a great job for us there. So I’d 
ask all members of the Assembly to welcome these two 
individuals to their Assembly. 
 
[13:45] 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — Presenting petitions. Oh, sorry, one more? 
Oh, presenting petitions . . . [inaudible] . . . you’re first. I 
recognize Swift Current.  
 
Mr. Hindley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province on Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Shell 
Lake, Mont Nebo, Turtle Lake, Big River, and Leoville. I do so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 
support of mental health and addictions services in the North. 
Northern Saskatchewan has one of the highest rates of suicide 
in the country. The Children’s Advocate has put out a report 
stating the lack of services in the North. The suicide rate is six 
times higher for First Nation boys than non-First Nation boys 
between the age of 10 and 19, and 26 times higher for First 
Nation girls than non-First Nation girls. 
 
And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to treat northern Saskatchewan 
residents with respect and dignity and to immediately 
invest in more mental health and wellness programs and 
facilities in the North. 

 
It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
petitions on behalf of concerned citizens that are standing up 
and speaking out against the Sask Party government’s 
devastating cut to the rental housing supplement, a cut that 
really hurts those on the tightest of margins across our province 
— people living with disabilities, families, low-income families 
with children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to immediately restore the 
Saskatchewan rental housing supplement. 



4210 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2018 

And these petitions are signed by concerned residents from 
Regina and Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition calling on the government to stop cuts to our children’s 
classrooms. Those who have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, 
wish to draw our attention to the cuts, the year-over-year cuts in 
education that have been experienced. And those who have 
signed this petition also know that backfilling $30 million of a 
$54 million cut is still a $24 million cut that has impacts on 
classrooms all around this province. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reverse 
the senseless cuts to our kids’ classrooms and stop making 
families, teachers, and everyone who works to support our 
education pay the price for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those who have signed this petition today reside in 
Melville and Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition to 
get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. And the 
undersigned residents of this petition from Saskatchewan want 
to bring to your attention the following: that Saskatchewan’s 
outdated election Act allows corporations, unions, and 
individuals, even those outside the province, to make unlimited 
donations to our province’s political parties. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan deserve to live in a fair 
province where all voices are equal and money cannot influence 
politics. And, Mr. Speaker, we know that over the past 10 years 
the Saskatchewan Party has received $12.61 million in 
corporate donations — of that, $2.87 million coming from 
companies outside Saskatchewan. You know, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan politics should belong to Saskatchewan people. 
 
So I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign finance laws 
to end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 
from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 
on individual donations. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

National Nursing Week 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

today to recognize International Nurses Week from May 7th to 
May 13th, first established by the International Council of 
Nurses in 1965. And May 12th, Mr. Speaker, the birthday of 
Florence Nightingale, is recognized as International Nurses 
Day. The Canadian theme for Nursing Week 2018 is 
#YesThisIsNursing. 
 
Nursing roles are evolving at an exponential rate, particularly 
with the influence of technology and the expansion of digital 
technologies. This year’s theme speaks to the expanding 
traditional and non-traditional roles, settings, and sectors in 
which nurses work, as well as the unique opportunities for 
nurses presented by social media and emerging technology 
trends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right now there is a nurse helping a woman 
become a mother, a nurse holding a dying man’s hand, a nurse 
starting a child’s IV [intravenous], a nurse listening to an 
Alzheimer’s patient tell a story, a nurse missing their family 
while caring for others. The role of nurses are many and varied. 
They don’t only work as nurses at the point of care, but also as 
educators, nurse practitioners, policy-makers, advocates, and 
researchers. Nurses are there for us in our ordinary and our 
extraordinary times. 
 
This week draws attention to nurses, increasing the awareness 
of the public, policy-makers, and governments of the many 
contributions of nursing to the well-being of Canadians. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in celebrating and 
saying thank you to all members of the nursing team for their 
hard work and dedication this week and every week. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 

Mental Health Week 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, May 7th 
to 13th is Mental Health Week here in Canada. This week has 
been observed since 1951 when the Canadian Mental Health 
Association first introduced the idea to raise awareness of 
mental health illness in Canada. 
 
Our government recognized the importance of providing 
appropriate and timely access to mental health services. This 
year a total new investment of 11.4 million is being targeted to 
improve mental health services in Saskatchewan. Almost half of 
that funding is for enhancing services and supports for children, 
youth, and families. Overall, the health system invests 284 
million on mental health services and support this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s 10-year mental health and 
addictions action plan continues to guide and set the priority 
areas for mental health and addiction investment in 
Saskatchewan. Our recent budget investment aligns with the 
action plan and increased access to mental health treatment for 
adults, children, and youth, and expands suicide prevention 
efforts. 
 
During this important week, Mr. Speaker, we all have a 
responsibility to raise awareness of mental health issues and to 
work to reduce the stigma associated with mental health illness. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



May 7, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4211 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Saskatoon Chapter of Executive Women International 
Officially Chartered 

 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 4th I had the 
pleasure of attending the chartering ceremony of the Saskatoon 
chapter of Executive Women International. Executive Women 
International was founded in San Francisco in 1938 by Ms. 
Lucille Johnson Perkins, who recognized the importance and 
potential of an association bringing women together to promote 
their firms and to improve their communities. 
 
EWI [Executive Women International] is a non-profit group of 
professional men and women who joined together to support 
one another professionally. More than 1,400 member 
companies and 1,600 representatives continue to thrive in EWI 
today in nearly 45 chapters located in the United States and 
Canada. 
 
The Saskatoon chapter was started just over a year ago with 
founding members Karen Skirten and Serena Dallas. In addition 
to providing networking and professional development 
opportunities, EWI of Saskatoon supports the local community 
through their ASIST [adult students in scholastic transition] 
scholarship program and has a close relationship with Read 
Saskatoon. This weekend EWI corporate board president 
Cheryl Hawkins came from Washington State for this important 
occasion. A dinner was held at the Hilton Garden Inn after the 
group toured Wanuskewin Heritage Park, the Berry Barn, and 
the Remai art gallery. 
 
I would like to congratulate the current president of EWI of 
Saskatoon, Alisa Thompson, and the entire board on achieving 
their chapter status. I want to invite all members to join me in 
congratulating EWI of Saskatoon on their recent chartering 
ceremony and thank them for their contributions to our 
community. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Locals Only Initiative Launched in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend I had 
the pleasure of attending, on behalf of the Premier, the launch 
of Locals Only in Saskatoon. I was joined by the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. Locals Only is a non-traditional partnership 
between AKA artist-run and CHEP Food Inc.  
 
Mr. Speaker, this youth-led art project will offer art and healthy 
food to residents in Saskatoon’s core neighbourhoods. This 
partnership will feature work by artists from Saskatoon and 
Canada, with projects based on how we grow food, how we 
cook for one another as well as care for our neighbourhoods. 
Along with the artwork, residents can look forward to healthy, 
fresh foods that will be provided by three mobile art and food 
carts. The art and food carts will be deployed not only to 
provide healthy food to communities, but to also spark a 
meaningful conversation on food security and community 
relationships. 
 

I had the opportunity as well to speak to Michael Peterson, 
project manager of Locals Only, and Yvonne Hanson, executive 
director of CHEP, about their unique partnership, what they will 
achieve, and how they will build upon their success. 
Saskatoon’s central core is becoming more diverse and more 
multicultural, and the Locals Only project looks at this change 
as an opportunity for intercultural exchange and focuses on 
ways to share and celebrate culture on many levels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members please join me in 
congratulating the members from AKA and CHEP Food Inc. on 
a successful launch and thank them for introducing such an 
important project. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

Walk a Mile in Her Shoes Event Held in Melfort 
 
Mr. Goudy: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday more than 70 
people walked a mile down Melfort’s main street in shiny red 
heels to raise awareness for an important cause. The 
international Walk a Mile in Her Shoes event is an opportunity 
to raise awareness about the serious causes and effects of sexual 
violence against women. 
 
The old saying “don’t judge someone until you’ve walked a 
mile in their shoes” has much more meaning when they’re 
four-inch pumps, Mr. Speaker. Uneven ground, drainage grates, 
and gravel were a few small obstacles that we faced. But, Mr. 
Speaker, this event is to raise support for women and children 
who have to overcome massive challenges that no one should 
have to face. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year we paid tribute to former Melfort mayor 
and MLA Kevin Phillips after his untimely passing. Kevin was 
a champion for the North East Outreach shelter and, together 
with Louise Schweitzer, he was able to see their dreams become 
a reality. This was the sixth annual Walk a Mile in Melfort. 
There were speeches from Louise Schweitzer and Kevin’s wife, 
April, inspiring us with their strength to continue on the cause. 
You did a great job yourself, Mr. Speaker, with your speech and 
started us off with Kevin’s inspiring words, “Let’s get ’er 
done.” 
 
Louise said that this year’s event raised approximately $10,000 
and we appreciate all who donated to this worthy cause. And I 
ask that all members join with me thanking everyone who 
supported the Walk a Mile in Her Shoes event. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Memorial Service for the Battle of the Atlantic 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
honoured to rise in the House today to recognize the sacrifice 
that our Canadian and Saskatchewan veterans made during the 
Battle of the Atlantic. Ranging from 1939 to 1945, this was the 
longest continuous battle of the Second World War. 
 
Canada played a key role in the battle as Allied forces valiantly 
fought to keep crucial supply lines to Europe open during the 



4212 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2018 

war. More than 70,000 Allied seamen, merchant mariners, and 
airmen lost their lives during the battle, including some 4,600 
Canadians. Many of those that died were lost to the sea with no 
gravesite to mark their sacrifice. Their valour and bravery were 
a crucial contribution to the ultimate victory of the Allied 
forces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to pay tribute to these heroes, a Battle of the 
Atlantic memorial service was held on Sunday hosted by the 
HMCS [Her Majesty’s Canadian Ship] Queen here in Regina. 
Among the many dignitaries attending was the Lieutenant 
Governor, the Honourable W. Thomas Molloy, and the director 
general, maritime equipment program management, Captain 
Christopher Earl. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the service the name of each ship that was lost 
was read aloud and a bell was rang, symbolizing the end of that 
crew’s watch. While these sailors’ watch has ended, their 
sacrifice will never be forgotten. We will remember them. 
Thank you. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

KidSport Month 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m proud 
to rise in this Assembly to acknowledge May as KidSport 
Month here in Saskatchewan. The month was proclaimed to 
raise awareness about the organization and all the work that 
they do. 
 
KidSport is a children’s charity which assists children of 
families facing financial obstacles to participate in community 
sport programs so that all kids can play. Their mission is to 
ensure no kids are left on the sidelines, and all should be given 
the opportunity to experience the positive benefits of organized 
sport. The charity has branches all across Saskatchewan and 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s incredibly important that we ensure our kids 
have the opportunity to participate in organized sports. Sports 
allows our kids to gain physical fitness while achieving social, 
intellectual, and moral development.  
 
I think I would be safe in saying all members of this House 
have fond memories of organized sports, as well as friendships 
started there that probably continue today. 
 
I’m proud that our government continues to invest in programs 
like KidSport through funds raised by Saskatchewan Lotteries. 
23.7 million was invested in programs that support a 
volunteer-driven delivery support system in sports, culture, and 
recreation last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this entire Assembly, I want to thank 
KidSport for everything they do for the children of our 
province. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Privacy Protections for Youth in  
Gay-Straight Alliances 

 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, former 
Premier Brad Wall spent the weekend at the founding 
convention of the right wing coalition United Conservative 
Party of Alberta. Yesterday a motion was passed at that 
convention that undermines the rights to privacy and safety for 
youth in Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this discriminatory motion, which seeks to repeal 
a law protecting the rights of young people to decide when and 
how to tell their parents about having joined a gay-straight 
alliance, not only directly violates these students’ rights to 
privacy, it puts LGBTQ+ [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, 
queer and/or questioning plus] youth in potential harm and tries 
to dismantle networks of safety that are so necessary for their 
health and well-being. 
 
GSAs [gay-straight alliance] are critical to ensuring that 
LGBTQ+ students have the supports that they need, free from 
risk, from harm, from discrimination. Mr. Speaker, this move 
by the Sask Party’s Conservative cousins has Saskatchewan 
students seeking some assurance that the Sask Party won’t 
follow suit. 
 
So does the Premier agree that every Saskatchewan student 
should have the fundamental right to join a gay-straight alliance 
and to decide for themselves how and when to tell their parents? 
And can he assure the people of Saskatchewan that he supports 
confidential gay-straight alliances in the province’s school 
system? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, in this province we have a 
policy in our school divisions, Mr. Speaker, and in our schools 
across the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, and it’s a 
policy to my understanding that has been adhered to and 
followed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this policy was put in place at the direction of the 
Ministry of Education, Mr. Speaker, was put in place in school 
divisions. And they’ve worked with communities, including 
parents, including educators across our province to develop 
policies in the formation of gay-straight alliances or similar 
groups, Mr. Speaker, in our schools. 
 
And the fact of the matter is, is that we are required, Mr. 
Speaker, to ensure the protection and privacy of individuals, 
Mr. Speaker, as per the Saskatchewan Human Rights 
Commission in 2013, as they stated this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

In addition, if a school legitimately needs and collects 
personal information that either directly or indirectly 
identifies a person’s sex as being different from their 
gender identity, the school must ensure that the 
individual’s privacy is protected and the information is 
kept confidential [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
 



May 7, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4213 

Delivery Services Within Health Care System and 
Transport of Patients 

 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And that’s very 
reassuring. I hope that that will be communicated to the UCP 
[United Conservative Party] members in Alberta, that that’s 
something we encourage them to do as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, physicians are raising the alarm because across the 
province people are waiting five to six weeks for biopsy results, 
weeks that are crucial for timely and effective care. Lab 
services have been cut in communities across the province, and 
getting test results, as one physician has said, and I quote, “is a 
terrible logistical problem.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister wasn’t able to answer doctors’ 
questions on this issue last week, so can the Premier tell us 
today, what’s the plan to address these unacceptably long 
waits? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the member 
alluded to, this issue was raised on Friday at the SMA, 
Saskatchewan Medical Association assembly, by a doctor from 
Swift Current. Our officials followed up with that doctor. We’re 
looking into the matter. We’re extremely concerned by that. 
 
I’m advised that a number of factors may be involved in that, 
including sample volumes and the complexity of the testing. 
I’m also advised that Regina — that’s where the Swift Current 
ones are done, Mr. Speaker — that Regina currently has a 
16-day backlog, but that processing time depends on the type of 
sample and urgency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, none of the changes to this process have been 
made since the formation of the provincial health authority. 
However, we are extremely concerned about that. Officials are 
going to continue to look at this and brief me as soon as 
possible within the next number of days. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Along with cuts to lab 
and diagnostic services across the province, one of the key 
reasons that the minister didn’t mention that is behind the 
inexcusable delays in cancer testing and treatment today is the 
closure of the Saskatchewan Transportation Company a year 
ago. 
 
In the Ministry of Health assessment of the impacts of the 
closure of STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company] that 
we’ve obtained through access to information, the changes for 
cancer care were specifically detailed, including anticipated 
impacts on patients who rely on the bus to get to and from 
appointments, on the shipping of drugs and other supplies, as 
well as the loss of overnight delivery, which STC was able to 
provide, but courier services do not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the health care services of rural people are just as 
important as anyone else in the province, but this party 
continues to take rural Saskatchewan for granted. To the 

Premier: what action, if any, has this government taken in the 
year since STC . . . 
 
The Speaker: — You referred to this party. This is a 
government and opposition. Thanks. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Pardon me, Mr. Speaker. This Sask Party 
government continues to take rural Saskatchewan for granted.  
 
To the Premier: what action, if any, has the government taken in 
the year since they shut down STC to address the logistical 
challenges that the closure has on wait times and the health care 
system and the disproportionate impacts on the health of people 
in rural areas? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, there are sort of two parts to 
that question. First of all is the impact of people getting to 
appointments, and the second part is lab tests and logistics on 
that, Mr. Speaker. I’ll get to that one in a minute. 
 
As far as the impact on people making appointments, Mr. 
Speaker, in the northern medical transportation program that 
provided funding for emergent, non-emergent medical 
transportation, Mr. Speaker, the bus company accounted for less 
than 1 per cent of the trips to medical appointments, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as far as the labs, Mr. Speaker, up until the 
wind-down of STC, we’d only been using STC for about nine 
months. Previous to that, they were using courier system, Mr. 
Speaker. In years previous to that, it would change periodically. 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are courier systems throughout the 
province that handle this, just like they do in every other 
province. Other provinces don’t own a bus company, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, depending on the year, the subsidy that STC 
would require would be anywhere from 10 to $20 million, Mr. 
Speaker. I would suggest that money could better be used on 
front-line health care. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Privacy Commissioner’s Recommendations Concerning 
Global Transportation Hub 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, last week the Minister of Justice 
sloughed off concerns about transparency at the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub], minimizing the Privacy Commissioner’s 
report that showed the GTH was not following freedom of 
information law. He claimed he doesn’t get involved in their 
day-to-day operations. Well the minister responsible is the 
Minister of Justice and, as we have seen, he likes to give 
lectures about the rule of law. The minister claims that the 
opposition is getting in the way of the success of the project, but 
I think he should take a long, hard look in the mirror, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
If he wants to clear the air, the minister should be reminding the 
folks at the GTH that the FOI [freedom of information] process 



4214 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2018 

isn’t a PR [public relations] exercise, it’s the law. Will the 
minister do his part in clearing the air, and direct the GTH to 
follow the Privacy Commissioner’s recommendations and 
release those documents? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 
opposite for the question. We appreciate, respect, and value the 
work of the Information and Privacy Commissioner and his 
staff. 
 
The GTH will take the appropriate amount of time to consider 
the recommendations. Under the legislation, the GTH has one 
month to respond and advise parties of its intentions. The GTH 
will meet that obligation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the intention of this government to ensure that 
the GTH grows and prospers. We could certainly use some 
support from the opposition in recognizing the successes that 
have taken place out there. We’d certainly appreciate their 
acknowledgement that there’s a facility out there that operates 
24 hours a day, 7 days a week, with 750 employees. We’d 
appreciate their recognition that there’s employees from 47 
different cultures. Each time someone from a new country is 
hired, a new flag is flown over there. And, Mr. Speaker, their 
recognition of that would certainly help. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this government can’t have it 
both ways. On the one hand, day after day members opposite 
stood in this Assembly defending the GTH mess with quotes 
from the Provincial Auditor, an independent officer of this 
legislature. But when it comes to another independent officer, 
the Information and Privacy Commissioner, this government 
looks the other way. The Sask Party has funnelled more than 
150 million taxpayers’ dollars to the GTH, so Saskatchewan 
taxpayers deserve full transparency or, the very least, that the 
law is being obeyed. 
 
So again to the minister: will he step in and call on the GTH to 
listen to the Information and Privacy Commissioner and release 
those records? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite has 
spent a lot of years practising law. She’s been in this House for 
a number of years and she knows full well how the legislation 
works. She wants us to comply with the law. Mr. Speaker, the 
law says 30 days. The GTH is working with the Information 
and Privacy Commissioner to ensure that a confidentially 
commercially sensitive matter is protected and that the rights of 
the citizens to know and be fully apprised of how their 
taxpayers’ dollars are being spent, takes place. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we support that and we want to see to it that they do 
comply with the law. And we will in fact do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again, I would like to see that the members 
opposite work to support the good things that are taking place 
out there. Mr. Speaker, I’d mentioned the number of different 

cultures, the number of different countries that are represented 
by the employees that work there. Mr. Speaker, CP Rail 
[Canadian Pacific Railway] has got a container port there. Sixty 
thousand containers move through that facility every year and, 
Mr. Speaker, we want to see that grow. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

New Hospital for Prince Albert 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, as an MLA for the Prince 
Albert area, the Premier would be well aware on the ongoing 
problems at Victoria Hospital in Prince Albert. The hospital is 
regularly over capacity and demand for services has been 
climbing each year. 
 
This is why community members were encouraged to hear the 
Premier commit to building a new hospital in Prince Albert, one 
fully funded by the province. On the campaign trail the Premier 
said the project would go forward at the end of the 
government’s three-year plan, but in his tours with the Finance 
minister last week the Premier muddied the water, saying, “The 
timeline will be when we can afford it . . .” This doesn’t provide 
much comfort for the people of Prince Albert.  
 
When can the people of Prince Albert expect the hospital the 
Premier promised? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, we are committed to the 
hospital in Prince Albert. Mr. Speaker, in fact to date $3.1 
million has been committed to advance work being done in that, 
Mr. Speaker, a number of things including planning for the 
hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the Premier very clearly said was that we 
would pay for the entire cost of the hospital, Mr. Speaker. It 
makes sense. It’s a huge service delivery unit for that entire part 
of the province, Mr. Speaker. He said we would pay for it when 
finances permit. Mr. Speaker, we are committed to that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, budgets are about choices. And 
if the Premier was serious about the commitment he made to the 
community of Prince Albert, he would keep his word and 
allocate the funding for this desperately needed hospital in the 
next budget. 
 
The Finance minister told community members she believed the 
new hospital for Prince Albert would be the next major 
infrastructure project for this government. Can the minister 
confirm this today? Can the people of Prince Albert and area 
expect to see funding for this project in the next budget? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, with $5.77 billion invested in 



May 7, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4215 

this year’s health budget, this province has come a long way, 
Mr. Speaker. We have come from a jurisdiction where we had 
the longest wait times for surgeries, Mr. Speaker, to one of the 
shortest wait times here in the nation of Canada. We have built 
infrastructure across this province, both in 15 rural long-term 
care and integrated health care facilities, Mr. Speaker. And we 
have invested in urban Saskatchewan, in hospitals for all 
Saskatchewan people, like the children’s hospital and the 
100-year-old Saskatchewan Hospital in the community of North 
Battleford, the Moose Jaw Hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we continue, we continue to invest in infrastructure as we 
move forward, much needed infrastructure that was not 
invested, Mr. Speaker, by the members opposite when they had 
the opportunity. A long-term care facility in Meadow Lake, Mr. 
Speaker, needs to be replaced. We have a hospital in Weyburn, 
Mr. Speaker, that needs to be replaced. And we have a hospital 
in Prince Albert that serves not just the community of Prince 
Albert but all of northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We 
continue to invest in infrastructure — over 900 doctors, over 
3,000 nurses, Mr. Speaker — and we will continue to invest on 
behalf of the people in this great province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Land Acquisition for Saskatoon Freeway 
 
Mr. Belanger: — We all note firm commitment for Prince 
Albert, Mr. Speaker, but time and time again we ask the 
government to show that they’ve learned their lesson from the 
Regina bypass with their Saskatoon bypass. But instead of 
taking heed, Mr. Speaker, they just plow ahead, like a French 
snow plow on the Regina bypass, with no thought of the 
consequences. 
 
The Provincial Auditor chastised this Sask Party government 
for posting the route online so land speculators could jump 
ahead of the process and make a killing. So what did they do 
with the plans for the Saskatoon bypass, Mr. Speaker? The 
exact same thing. They posted them online for everyone to see. 
Did the Highways minister even read the auditor’s report? And 
doesn’t he realize this is exactly what caused the cost at the 
Regina bypass to spiral out of control? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank the 
member opposite for the question. And that’s exactly what we 
did do; we have looked at the auditor’s recommendations. And 
one of the recommendations that the auditor did make was if we 
were going to pursue with a highway or a network somewhere, 
that we do the land acquisitions way ahead of time, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What we are now is . . . I mean, the Saskatoon freeway isn’t on 
our five-year, isn’t on our ten-year plan, but what we are doing 
is narrowing the scope of where that freeway may go, Mr. 
Speaker. And we are looking at the planning stages on 
developing that, so not only where we know to go but also the 
city knows where we’re planning on going, so the developers 
can continue to grow where they want to go, and which doesn’t 
relate to the pricing of the highway, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, they’ve wasted hundreds of 
millions of dollars of taxpayer money at the Regina bypass, Mr. 
Speaker, hundred of millions. I really hope we don’t see a 
repeat at the Saskatoon bypass, but unfortunately, it’s déjà vu 
all over again. They are failing to learn from their mistakes and 
follow the recommendations of the auditor but, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s our children and grandchildren who are going to have to 
pick up that tab. There are billions of dollars at stake.  
 
Has the Highways minister read the auditor’s report? How’s he 
going to make sure that the Saskatoon bypass doesn’t turn into 
the same gong show that we’ve seen at the Regina bypass? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
let’s make it very clear. We are very proud of the Regina bypass 
and what it’s done. That is a project that is on time and on 
budget. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we have opened overpasses ahead 
of schedule on that, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — And the number one reason why we did 
the Regina bypass, obviously, Mr. Speaker — and I wish the 
members opposite would recognize it — is safety. Safety was 
our primary concern, Mr. Speaker, on the east side of the 
bypass. I could quote from fire rescue, from first responders on 
the east side of the city where they’ve said the jaws of life used 
to go out on a daily occurrence on No. 1 east of Regina. Now 
they can’t remember when the last time it went out, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The communities like what’s going on there, Mr. Speaker. They 
like the fact that there’s no intersections, that they merge onto 
No. 1 to come into Regina to come to work. It’s a good project 
for the people that live out there. It’s a safe project for the 
people that live out there. It’s a good project for the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

People With Disabilities Working in Government 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Sask 
Party likes to tell us that their goal is to make Saskatchewan the 
best place in the country to live and work with a disability, but 
troubling numbers released last week raise serious doubts about 
their commitment. Since 2013-14, there were 333 people with 
disabilities working across government, but in 2017-18, there 
were only 241. That’s 92 fewer people, a reduction of over 27 
per cent.  
 
To the Minister for the Public Service Commission: how can 
the Sask Party say that they’re making our province a better 
place for people with disabilities when there are fewer and 
fewer people with disabilities working in government each and 
every year? 
 



4216 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2018 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First off, I think the opposition across there has no leg to stand 
on whatsoever on the disability file, Mr. Speaker. What we’ve 
done in the disability is we created the SAID [Saskatchewan 
assured income for disability] program, Mr. Speaker. We are 
working with employment agencies to be able to employ people 
with intellectual and with physical disabilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But they want to talk about percentages and numbers, Mr. 
Speaker. I can certainly talk about the 440 wait-list that was 
under their . . . with people with intellectual disabilities. And 
the number that was thrown out at committee the other night, 
Mr. Speaker, by the member from Rosemont of 200 people 
sitting waiting for intellectual disabilities, which we confirmed 
is not accurate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, our disability file is very strong, Mr. Speaker: the 
transition from Valley View, the people that we have moved on 
Valley View. Mr. Speaker, our record is phenomenal on 
disabilities, and I stand by everything that we’ve done. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, that wasn’t even close to an 
answer. I asked the Minister of Public Service Commission . . . 
And people with disabilities just want to work. This reduction 
in opportunities for people with disabilities is just not 
acceptable. Every single ministry reported a decline in the 
number of people with disabilities . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Can I have a little order from this proximity, 
please. That would be great. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every single ministry 
reported a decline in the number of people with disabilities who 
worked there, except for one ministry that saw an increase of 
one employee. 
 
This is a problem that is systematic and touches every single 
ministry in government. The overall size of the public service 
hasn’t really changed that much since 2013, but the 27 per cent 
reduction in the number of people with disabilities is huge. Why 
are there fewer people with disabilities working for the 
government, and what is the Sask Party going to do to increase 
their representation in the civil service? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thanks very much for the 
question. And this question came up in estimates last week, and 
we had a good discussion with the member from Regina 
Elphinstone as well. 
 
The Public Service Commission is committed to diversity, to 
allowing minority groups every opportunity to become 
members of the public service, and they are committed to those 
with disabilities. Each and every ministry is committed to 
ensuring that it’s a welcoming place to those with disabilities 
and trying to do their best to do that. We encourage individuals 

to consider the Government of Saskatchewan as an option in 
their career path, and we continue to make it a priority.  
 
Is there more work to do, Mr. Speaker? Absolutely there is. But 
I’m confident we make the Government of Saskatchewan a 
career choice for individuals, and we are as welcoming as 
possible. And we will continue to strive and continue to strive 
to do better, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Transition to National Job Bank Website 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, potential Saskatchewan workers 
and employers are wondering where the jobs are. On May 1st, 
saskjobs.ca officially shut down. Of course the government 
prefers to use the term “wind-down” but, Mr. Speaker, we saw 
what wind-down meant for STC. 
 
Now the minister will try and convince the people of 
Saskatchewan that everything is okay, but people looking for 
work and employers looking to hire need more than 
reassurance. To the minister, a very simple question: how many 
jobs were posted on saskjobs.ca one month ago and how many 
are posted currently for Saskatchewan on the national Job 
Bank? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve had the opportunity to talk a bit about the 
Saskjobs transition to the national Job Bank over the course of 
the last week or two here in this House and out in the rotunda. I 
think we’ve put forward to the public a fulsome explanation for 
that, which is that we are going to see increased functionality. 
We are going to see increased usage. We are going to see just 
an overall better experience integrated with a number of federal 
programs, as well with regard to labour market and 
immigration, by working with the Government of Canada 
collaboratively on the transition to national Job Bank. 
 
This has been something we’ve been working on for literally 
years, Mr. Speaker. Other jurisdictions have made the same 
transition for the very same reasons, Mr. Speaker. We know 
there is going to be a period of transition. There is going to be a 
period where employers and those seeking jobs are going to be 
transitioning to the new site. But we are very confident that in 
the long-term this is the right decision for the public and the 
right decision for the labour market. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, this transition isn’t something that 
just started on May 1st. The government’s been planning it for 
months and there are currently thousands of fewer jobs posted. 
Since the minister didn’t know, I’ll help him out with the 
numbers. In Regina alone, over one month ago, there were 
1,700 jobs on saskjobs.ca. As of today, there are approximately 
500 postings. And that’s just for Regina, Mr. Speaker. Now 
either these jobs no longer exist or the government’s 
wind-down transition is not going according to plan. 



May 7, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4217 

The new site is clearly not working for employers or 
employees, and Saskatchewan people can’t afford another Sask 
Party government wind-down, Mr. Speaker. So how is the 
minister going to fix the mess he’s created. Where are the jobs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I’d said in my 
previous response and in previous responses to that, this has 
been a part of a long-considered and planned transition to 
national Job Bank for a host of economic reasons that are going 
to benefit the labour market of this province in the long term.  
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I would actually like to give the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] credit for one thing, and I often don’t give 
the NDP credit for a bunch. But, Mr. Speaker, the NDP have a 
unique and singular ability to be on the wrong side of every 
issue. This is one example, Mr. Speaker, but there are other 
examples: the carbon tax, Mr. Speaker, which is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Well that’ll be the end of question period, but 
let’s be very clear. Both sides are playing with the words, okay? 
So don’t be sitting there yelling at the Chair knowing full well 
that you’re both participating. That’ll be the end of question 
period. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 250 through 252. 
 
The Speaker: — Ordered 250 to 252. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of 
Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — Okay. I do now leave the Chair for the 
Committee of Finance. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
[14:30] 
 
The Chair: — I’ll call the Committee of Finance to order. The 
business before the committee is the interim supply. I’ll call on 
the Minister of Finance to make any opening comments that she 
may have and move the resolution. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Interim 
supply is a temporary funding mechanism government uses to 
ensure key government programs continue uninterrupted while 
the main estimates are being reviewed and debated. 
 
For many years, Saskatchewan’s interim supply was provided 
through one or more interim supply bills tabled at the beginning 
of each fiscal year. In 2008 The Financial Administration Act, 
1993 was revised to include provisions that automatically give 
each vote interim appropriation equal to two-twelfths of its 

prior year appropriation. This appropriation is available only to 
continue programs that were established in the previous year, 
ensuring government’s critical work continues uninterrupted 
while the new budget is being reviewed. These legislative 
changes, combined with a standardized parliamentary calendar, 
have eliminated the need for interim supply bills most years. 
 
This year the Assembly agreed to a sessional order that revised 
the dates of the spring 2018 sitting. The 2018-19 budget was 
tabled on April 10th and, in accordance with revised calendar 
rules, completion date was deferred from May 17th to May 
31st. As a result to this later session, the two-twelfths interim 
supply provided through The Financial Administration Act, 
1993 will be insufficient to ensure all critical government 
programming continues without interruption in all votes. With 
this bill, we are seeking approval for 256 million of additional 
interim appropriation for four votes. This temporary 
appropriation supplements the two-twelfths already provided 
and is subject to the same restrictions. It is available only to 
ensure existing programming continues and is not provided to 
implement new budgetary measures. Amounts provided through 
this interim supply bill are considered part of the appropriation 
described in the main estimates, which are currently being 
reviewed through standing committees of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
This interim supply bill includes 107 million for the Ministry of 
Health which, due to scheduled payment dates, must make five 
biweekly payments to the Saskatchewan Health Authority 
during the interim supply period. If the fifth payment is 
delayed, the Health Authority will be unable to meet key 
financial commitments, including its employee payroll. 
 
The bill also includes 80 million for the Ministry of Social 
Services. We are requesting this additional interim funding to 
ensure the ministry is able to fund its various assistance and 
support payments at current caseloads and meet key scheduled 
payments for the end of May and 1st of June. These include 
CBO [community-based organization] payments, various 
assistance and support payments, and some employee payroll. 
These amounts generally support vulnerable individuals who 
require payment on a timely basis. 
 
And there is 65 million for the Ministry of Education. On 
January 1st, 2018, The Education Property Tax Act took effect 
and the municipalities now remit most education property tax 
directly to the General Revenue Fund. As a result, school 
operating grants paid by the General Revenue Fund increased 
starting January 2018. This additional interim supply ensures 
the Ministry of Education can fully fund school divisions in 
May at the increased amount. 
 
Finally there is 4 million for the Ministry of Justice and 
Attorney General vote to ensure it meets all employee payroll 
requirements through the interim supply period. Funding in the 
Ministry of Justice and Attorney General vote is primarily for 
ministry salaries such as court worker salaries and for grants to 
the Legal Aid Commission to help the commission pay its 
salary and operating costs. This funding ensures those payments 
continue as scheduled. 
 
With this additional interim supply, we believe ministries and 
agencies funded through the General Revenue Fund will be able 



4218 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2018 

to meet their expenses and continue critical programming until 
the main appropriation Act is enacted. 
 
As such, I move: 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $256,000,000 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 
ending March 31st, 2019. 
 

The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved the 
following resolution, no. 1: 
 

Resolved that the sum not exceeding $256,000,000 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months 
ending March 31, 2019. 

 
Is the committee ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved the 
following resolution: 
 

Resolved that the sum not exceeding $256,000,000 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ended 
March 31, 2019. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move the following resolution: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31st, 
2019, the sum of $256,000,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved resolution 
no. 2: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2019, 
the sum of $256,000,000 be granted out of the General 
Revenue Fund. 

 
Is the committee ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Chair: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that the committee rise and 
that the Chair report the committee has agreed to the resolutions 

and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that the committee rise and the Chair report that the committee 
has agreed to the resolutions and ask for leave to sit again. Is 
that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 
agreed to certain resolutions, has instructed me to report the 
same, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read a first 
time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the 
resolutions be now read the first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance moved that the 
resolution be now read the first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of the resolutions. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. Pursuant to rule 32(1) the 
minister shall move first reading of the appropriation bill. I 
recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Bill No. 130 — The Appropriation Act, 2018 (No. 1) 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that Bill No. 130, The 
Appropriation Act, 2018 (No. 1) be now introduced and read a 
first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 
No. 130, The Appropriation Act, 2018 (No. 1) be now 
introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 



May 7, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4219 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I request leave of the Assembly and 
under rule 32(1)(e) that the bill be now read a second and third 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave that the bill 
be now read a second and third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave has been granted. The minister may 
proceed to move second and third reading. I recognize the 
minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I move that Bill No. 130, The 
Appropriation Act, 2018 (No. 1) be now read a second and third 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 130, The Appropriation Act, 2018 (No. 1) be now 
read a second and third time. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second and third 
reading of this bill. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 76 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Makowsky that Bill No. 76 — The 
Parks Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And as 
ever, good to take my place in this Assembly and to join debate 
on the issues of the day, in this case Bill No. 76, The Parks 
Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of questions that arise from 
this particular piece of legislation that are better addressed in 
committee in terms of the kind of detail and more complex line 
of questioning that is afforded in that venue. But certainly that 
this government is bringing what is provisionally known as the 

Porcupine Hills Area Provincial Park . . . It will be useful to 
have that broader discussion as to what, in terms of bringing 
together a number of existing recreational areas, recreational 
sites that are already existent, Mr. Speaker, and how that 
amalgamation into a broader provincial park, what the chief 
benefit of that will be, Mr. Speaker, and then in terms of the 
broader question of consultation as has been carried out. 
 
Now there are a number of undertakings made in the minister’s 
second reading speech and we take those at their face value. But 
we certainly have a number of questions that arise from 
individual First Nations that are involved in that particular 
region. I’m thinking, of course, of what are colloquially known 
as the Kamsack Bands, Mr. Speaker, in terms of Keeseekoose 
and Cote and in terms of, in one of those circumstances, Mr. 
Speaker, questions about the very leadership of the individual 
First Nation and the legitimacy thereof that’s currently being 
batted back and forth in the courts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there’s some questions that arise in terms of, you know, to 
what extent that the consultation has been carried out, what has 
been identified in terms of lands that constituted traditional use, 
and in terms of what safeguards are there in the legislation and 
in the plan going forward for the park. But as well, Mr. 
Speaker, the very question of who has been consulted with is a 
question that we’d like a more detailed response to, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And again, it was good that when the bill was introduced there 
was representation in the gallery from, in that case, Mr. 
Speaker, Key First Nation, and good to see those folks. But 
again in terms of what’s happening with the leadership, that has 
been thrown into question by court. And then what sort of 
fiduciary responsibilities arise from consultation that is not well 
founded or is questionable in its basis, Mr. Speaker. We’ll look 
forward to putting those questions to the minister at greater 
length in the committee. 
 
[14:45] 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d certainly urge my colleague, the 
Government House Leader, to, when I sit down momentarily, to 
do what need be done to move this particular piece of 
legislation on to the committee stage so that we might have that 
very discussion, Mr. Speaker. But again we have a number of 
questions that we’ll be pursuing in committee as regards Bill 
No. 76, The Parks Amendment Act, 2017. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
. . . Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 76, The Parks Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time. Pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 



4220 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2018 

this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 76, The Parks 
Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to the Standing Committee 
on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 82 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 82 — The 
SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
stand today to add some remarks with regards to Bill 82. This 
session I’m new to being the critic for SaskEnergy, but I was a 
previous employee of SaskPower and we worked closely with 
SaskEnergy employees as well. And so it’s an area that I am 
happy to commit to as well and I love learning more about what 
they do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was reviewing the minister’s comments when he 
presented this bill, and I’m going to read some of his comments 
into the record. He had a quote saying, “These updates will 
allow the corporation to better serve private sector business 
opportunities to support growth and competitiveness.” Mr. 
Speaker, I’m unsure of exactly what he means by that, and I’m 
sure we’ll have a lot of time to discuss this in committee. 
 
My understanding is that there’s changes within this bill to the 
exclusive rights for distribution and transportation of natural 
gas to support new business ventures. So I’m unsure if any 
companies have approached the government and expressed 
interest in this and this is why these changes are coming 
forward at this point, and what kind of impact this could have 
on the public dividends if we allow privatization of some of 
these services or allow others to participate with distribution. I 
have to admit, Mr. Speaker, that it looks like this bill is used to 
privatize distribution and it seems like it’s a backdoor 
privatization plan. 
 
More information that the minister provided indicated that 
“These amendments will allow SaskEnergy to provide 
efficiencies and enhance safety to the corporation . . .” So I feel 
that these are some fancy wording to try and make 
Saskatchewan residents believe that allowing competition — 
probably out-of-province or -country competition — in 
businesses is a good thing, but the reality is that Saskatchewan 
residents will lose control over their Crown corporation and 
lose power and control over rates and lose out on dividends. 
 
So I guess some questions would be, what would be the rates to 
these companies that would come forward? What would be the 
terms or conditions? And there was some talk about having an 

interest rate on overdue fees. So what is the government 
thinking when they make these discussions? Like when they’re 
presenting this bill, there must have been some thought of what 
that’s going to look like. So that’ll be some discussion we’ll 
have. 
 
Allowing third party trucking to qualified companies and 
allowing operators the right to move high-pressure natural gas 
access land parcel boundaries. I’m wondering why this is 
something that’s been implemented in this bill. What is wrong 
with the current practices? Was there some challenges? Was 
there some incidences? Was there some changes done with the 
current practices to address these concerns prior to deciding to 
change the whole Act and take away power from SaskEnergy? 
Has there been anything put forward before? And what were the 
successes and what were the challenges? Those are going to be 
some interesting questions to have. 
 
Of course with most bills when they’re brought forward for 
amendment, there’s some housekeeping, and this one is no 
exception. There’s housekeeping to be current with recent case 
law and corporate policy, such as with language. And they’re 
changing the fiscal year, so that’s another interesting aspect. 
I’m not sure what is bringing that forward, so there’ll be some 
questions with regards to that as well. 
 
There’s updated legislation to reflect the closure of customer 
services to pedestrian traffic. And, Mr. Speaker, I have to say 
that I know this has impacted the most vulnerable. We have 
people coming to our office and enquiring where they can speak 
to a customer service agent in person because some individuals 
have little to no access to Internet services or to telephone 
access as well. So I know that’s been an issue too. In what ways 
are customers receiving their customer services? In what 
aspects has SaskEnergy made it so that it’s more convenient for 
customers? So there’ll be some questions with regards to that. 
 
There’s an amendment that makes the failure to comply with 
regulations an offence and allowing for better enforcement of 
regulations. That’s all important stuff. We want to ensure that 
regulations are being followed through. 
 
There’s a new provision that allows for the transportation of gas 
via third party-owned trucks subject with conditions. But this 
also means an order in council’s no longer needed for each 
trucking firm wanting to engage in this business. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m wondering how there will be some level of 
accountability on who is getting this access and how a person 
could be informed about that. 
 
There’s also some changes to allow the corporation the right to 
enter premise and lands where the corporation has pipelines but 
gas service is not active. Mr. Speaker, I think that’s an 
important aspect of this piece of legislation. I know this came 
about due to a recent court decision. 
 
But I know with my previous experience with working with 
some SaskEnergy individuals that it’s so very important for 
them to still keep in contact with those gas meters, ensuring that 
they’re in good quality and safe standing. And they are the 
property of SaskEnergy and so of us. So it’s important that we 
ensure that they’re in good quality shape and nobody’s 
tampering with them because things can become quite 



May 7, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4221 

dangerous if people are tampering with them. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I have a lot of questions that I’m going to be 
bringing forward within committee. I am prepared to bring this 
bill forward to committee and to have this further discussion 
with the minister and his officials. So with that, I’m going to 
cease my remarks. 
 
The Speaker: — Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Question before the Assembly is a motion by 
the minister that Bill No. 82, The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 
2017 be now read a second time. Pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 82, The 
SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 86 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Merriman that Bill No. 86 — The 
Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017 be now read 
a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not going 
to go on very long here today as it relates to Bill No. 86, The 
Child and Family Services Amendment Act. I do look forward to 
thorough questions in committee. I invite participation of 
stakeholders across the province, those that we’ve been 
consulting across the province. I invite the direct engagement of 
many, Mr. Speaker, because these are the kinds of changes that 
we need to make sure we get right. 
 
Far too often with this current Sask Party government, they 
truly fail to consult, fail to listen to stakeholders. And when it 
comes to the lives and the safety and the well-being of children 
across our province, we simply can’t afford to not get it right, 
Mr. Speaker. I know many of the changes are described by the 
minister as being housekeeping in nature, and if that’s the case 
it’s, you know, that’s well and good. 
 
We’ll certainly want to make sure that there’s not any 
unintended consequences to the changes that have been brought 
forward. And certainly it’s those agencies and partners and First 

Nations and Métis organizations across the province, youth 
organizations across the province, that will know this best. So I 
ask them to make sure they assess this legislation and to be in 
touch on this front. Their input is really important. 
 
That being said, it’s disappointing as well to have legislation 
brought forward to this Assembly and the time put to it if it’s 
only housekeeping in nature, Mr. Speaker, because for our 
children and young people all across our province, what they 
need is action to address the inequities and inequality that’s so 
real, the conditions that so many face that are unfair and 
limiting of them living up to their full potential, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we’ll assess what the minister means by housekeeping. What 
I hope is that means a modernization of language that’s 
reflective of the needs of children and youth across the 
province. 
 
But where I’m disappointed is the lack of action, the lack of 
recognition by this Sask Party government of the incredibly 
challenging conditions that so many young people are living in 
across our province. The inadequate supports and services from 
a mental health perspective, Mr. Speaker, from an addictions 
perspective all across our province. And I would look to this 
government to take every opportunity to step up to the plate 
with the resources that are needed, but also the kinds of 
legislative changes that are needed to properly support young 
people all across our province. 
 
And in this province, we’re not unlike other provinces where 
we have a shameful history, Mr. Speaker, that includes things 
like the Sixties Scoop. We need a government to redouble 
efforts on every front to ensure fairness and respect for all 
within the province. And as it relates to the fifties scoop, we 
still see a government that’s delaying that very important 
apology, but also the important action towards reconciliation in 
a province that faces, and so many young people and so many 
families facing, the intergenerational challenges and trauma of 
residential schools, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our children and youth deserve and need action and support 
from their government. And on occasion after occasion, we just 
simply, in file after file, we just don’t see that with this Sask 
Party government. And in fact we see changes, of course, that 
are walking back supports for young people around the housing 
side as well. 
 
Now we see the scrapping of the rental housing supplement, 
Mr. Speaker, which provided very basic support, but essential 
support, for families with children living with the lowest of 
incomes, Mr. Speaker, with the tightest of budgets. And peeling 
those dollars away from children in already vulnerable 
circumstances from families, many of them already struggling 
with putting food into the cupboards and the fridge, Mr. 
Speaker, is simply not acceptable and it’s detrimental, of 
course, to those young people and families. It’s detrimental to 
our province living up to, preventing our province from living 
up to its full potential. 
 
You know, I come . . . Before this Assembly, I served as an 
educator and I apply that lens to many of the decisions that are 
made in this Assembly. And I know for certain that young 
people, you know, aren’t able to learn if they don’t have food in 



4222 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2018 

their belly or a stable roof over their head. And the kinds of 
choices that we see from this government are compromising 
those two very important pieces and all those factors that are 
external to the classroom that directly impede learning, that are 
a direct barrier to learning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:00] 
 
But as I say, we’ll engage in the changes that I think have been 
described by the minister mostly as housekeeping. We’ll review 
those changes throughout the committee process. We invite, 
encourage those partners supporting children and youth all 
across the province to engage in this process, to reach out, to 
make sure that they’re apprised of this legislation as well. Far 
too often with the Sask Party government we see them, the Sask 
Party government making changes in isolation from those that 
are directly involved, the stakeholders and in this case, Mr. 
Speaker, those directly involved in the well-being and care of 
children and youth across our province. 
 
So we’ll look forward to time in committee and certainly, as I 
say, I invite and encourage all across the province to assess this 
legislation and to connect with us through this important 
process. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the minister that Bill No. 86, The Child and Family 
Services Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. 
Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 86, The Child 
and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to the 
Standing Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 89 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Eyre that Bill No. 89 — The School 
Choice Protection Act/Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure today 
to rise and enter into second reading debate on Bill No. 89, The 
School Choice Protection Act. Mr. Speaker, this is a very 

important piece of legislation. I am happy to have the 
opportunity to speak to it for a little bit today. We haven’t seen 
this bill up too often on the order paper this session and there 
are a lot of outstanding questions here that do remain 
outstanding. 
 
I want to first start by just affirming the official opposition 
support for publicly funded education and by that, Mr. Speaker, 
we mean both the separate and the public school systems. This 
bill, for some context, of course came following Justice Layh’s 
ruling on the Theodore case, a case that goes all the way back to 
2005 and a situation in this province that has seen mediation, 
has seen a great deal of attention, and remains a very, very large 
outstanding question with regard to the way that funding is 
delivered in this province for publicly funded school systems. 
 
As we said going back to when that ruling was announced, we 
recognized immediately as opposition that this was potentially a 
very impactful decision and we called immediately for support 
for the appeal. When this court challenge was undertaken, I 
think it was the general understanding of almost all parties 
involved that this would be a case that would not only have 
ruling at the Court of Queen’s Bench but at the Court of Appeal 
and most likely the Supreme Court level, Mr. Speaker. And that 
is something that we continue to hear from those in the sector. 
 
As I said, we immediately supported the appeal of this decision, 
recognizing that it would have a huge and potentially very 
quick — within a year — impact on many students and both 
school systems in the province, and it left a lot of questions for 
students, for parents, and for both school systems. We know 
that potentially it would have, if implemented, would have seen 
between 5 and 10,000 students moving from one system to 
another. And it did create a great deal of uncertainty and 
concern for many students and parents in the province, as I did 
say. 
 
There was also a broader context that I think bears talking 
about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we saw this decision come 
down right after last year’s budget, a budget that saw $54 
million, more than $54 million taken out of the front lines of 
education in this province. We saw also in that budget the bill 
. . . Bill 63 was announced in the budget, a bill that really 
threatened to reduce the number of boards and wholly take over 
the powers of publicly elected school boards in this province, 
and of course that is both the separate and the public boards. 
And there was a great deal of concern about that. 
 
Because it was a budget bill, we only saw five hours of scrutiny 
of that bill, but we sure heard a lot from the people of 
Saskatchewan. And so that was the context in which this 
decision came down. And we saw the then premier move 
immediately to muse about the notwithstanding clause. 
Importantly, this clause is very rarely used in the country. I 
think any time that you endeavour to set aside the Charter of 
Rights and Freedoms, it should be met with a great deal of 
scrutiny and forethought, and that’s immediately what we called 
for. But we saw the premier musing about that even before the 
appeal was entered into. 
 
We do have a number of questions. I’ve had the opportunity to 
meet with boards around the province about this issue, and of 
course this has been top of mind for many boards in the 



May 7, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4223 

province, as have of course the cuts to education, which is a 
separate issue, as well as the authority of boards that have been 
undermined by this government. So having the opportunity in 
committee to ask some more questions of this bill and think 
about the long-term consequences, potential consequences and 
implications were this bill to be passed, I think is incumbent 
upon all of us on both sides of the aisle, and to hear from those 
in the sector who again will be very impacted by a decision. 
 
What we know now is that there was a date for a stay of 
judgment in April, which means that the ruling will not be 
implemented in the interim period while this appeal goes 
forward. We do know that Alberta and Ontario, both the public 
and Catholic school trustees associations, have entered in . . . 
have requested intervenor status in this case. Of course it has 
implications not only in Saskatchewan, but in Alberta and in 
Ontario, and will continue to garner a great deal of scrutiny. 
 
We also know that, as I had mentioned, there is some 
expectation that this may be a case that is heard at the Supreme 
Court of Canada, and that that will take several years for this 
case to wind through the provincial Court of Appeal and to the 
Supreme Court level. What we know about the notwithstanding 
clause is that there is a five-year sunset clause attached to it so 
when it is invoked, governments have five years until it has to 
be revisited. We know that that potentially could, that five-year 
window could come before we see a ruling at the Supreme 
Court level, and the implications of that. I would like to have 
opportunity to talk to the minister and those in the sector about 
what that might mean. 
 
We also know that this bill, which I am told is rather unusual, 
also proposes to operate not only notwithstanding the Charter of 
Rights and Freedoms but also notwithstanding the Human 
Rights Code. And we have heard that there are some significant 
concerns about that as well. 
 
I think that again we affirm our support for the job that both 
systems do with regard to educating children in this province: 
the work of boards, the work of teachers and administration in 
both of those systems, and the very important work that they do 
despite some very trying circumstances, particularly as of late 
with the scarcity of resources in both systems, frankly, Mr. 
Speaker — and also the ability of both boards to work together 
towards solutions in those very trying circumstances. 
 
I do sincerely look forward to the opportunity to sit down with 
the minister and his officials and again hopefully invite the 
participation of stakeholders to committee so we can give this a 
really thorough going-over and be very thoughtful and 
goal-focused with regard to this bill and ensure that there is 
proper oversight and just giving the notwithstanding clause the 
scrutiny that is deserved. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I think I will conclude my remarks and 
am prepared to see this bill moved to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the minister that Bill No. 89, The School Choice 

Protection Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 89, The School 
Choice Protection Act, 2017 be committed to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 90 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Makowsky that Bill No. 90 — The 
Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Good to join 
debate again this afternoon and take my place to share a few 
remarks on Bill No. 90, The Heritage Property Amendment Act, 
2017. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, the heritage property regime in the 
province of Saskatchewan is one that is of ongoing concern and 
certainly one that has been part of the public discourse and how 
that relates to decisions of this government, particularly as 
regards expenditure around heritage foundation, Mr. Speaker, 
and the presentation of those funds, Mr. Speaker, at budget 
time. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, the question in focus with Bill No. 90, 
wherein it changes the duties of the review board to ensure 
operational separation from the rest of the foundation and 
wherein the review board will now consist of at least three 
people who are appointed solely to carry out review board 
duties; wherein it updates the rules for hearings before the 
review board including the parties’ right to be heard and the 
ability to accept any evidence deemed relevant and also 
updating how the board will notify the public of the time, date, 
location of a heritage property hearing; and also wherein it adds 
a section to allow for more efficient processes for amending 
existing provincial heritage property designations . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a piece of legislation that’s of particular 
interest to myself coming out of Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
where heritage property as late as this weekend in the Regina 
Leader-Post, property in the Warehouse District and its 
relationship to the municipal heritage regime was the subject of 
some discussion. 
 



4224 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2018 

[15:15] 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, in terms of making sure that your 
legislation is up to date and as efficient and as effective as 
possible, this certainly is something that any piece of legislation 
should be . . . Certainly it should be the goals for legislation in 
any case for the government. And in this case, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ll have more particular questions around the legislation and 
its force and effect. 
 
But we do note, and again this will be the grist for more 
significant and thoroughgoing discussion at committee stage, 
Mr. Speaker, wherein I would draw members’ attention to a 
letter to the editor. In this case, it ran in the Regina Leader-Post. 
The editorial dated — or the letter — in the edition, the 1st 
November 2017 edition. And the letter/editorial is entitled 
“Province needs to prove that heritage matters.” And, 
“Government must back preservation, conservation, writes Dr. 
Merle Massie.” 
 
And Dr. Massie hails from Biggar. But more germane to the 
discussion we’re undertaking here, Mr. Speaker, is her status as 
a former Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation board member. 
And some of the concerns that Dr. Massie raises around the 
very things that are the grist of this particular piece of 
legislation in terms of the way that foundations are funded by 
government but are to be at arm’s length. There are a number of 
contentions made around: 
 

The current government has allowed its middle and upper 
management to run roughshod over the SHF, trying to 
dictate what by law should be an arm’s-length foundation 
as a personal fiefdom. 
 
After years of growing tension, the government saw fit to 
quietly let all of the old board members go, and appoint an 
all-new board, no doubt hoping . . . they would be better at 
bowing. But the new board members are just as smart — 
smarter — than the old. They have formally cut all ties 
with the ministry, and have hired their own manager and 
their own grants and finance officer. The board and the 
staff are dedicated to serving the province of 
Saskatchewan, as is their mandate. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I guess there are a number of points made by this 
former board member, Dr. Massie, as regards to the way that 
affairs were conducted at the Saskatchewan Heritage 
Foundation, and again how that relates to the piece of 
legislation under question here today, that are fairly concerning. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the realignment of the 
powers that are entailed in The Heritage Property Act, we’ll 
have more questions about those, but we’ll certainly have more 
questions about the contents of this legislation in light of the 
former board being vacated. What’s the status of the 
relationship between the Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation 
and the government, and is this the appropriate, proper 
relationship between these two entities? 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, we ask very serious, very 
accomplished people across this province to take a hand, to play 
a role in various boards and agencies. And the kind of 
disruption that has gone on with this particular board, we’ll be 

looking for more detailed answers from the ministry and from 
the minister as regards what has gone on here. What is there to 
be fixed? Does Bill 90 fit the bill, and what work might remain, 
Mr. Speaker? 
 
So those are some of the issues we’ll be looking to have a more 
detailed and thoroughgoing discussion on at the committee 
stage. And at this point, Mr. Speaker, I’d invite my colleague, 
the Government House Leader, to do what need be done in 
terms of moving Bill No. 90, The Heritage Property 
Amendment Act, 2017 on to committee stage. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 90, The Heritage Property 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 90, The Heritage 
Property Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 103 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 103 — The Land 
Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise this afternoon to enter into the record a few thoughts about 
The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, prior to allowing it to move 
on to committee. 
 
Now this bill is seeking to modernize some legislation that is 
quite old, Mr. Speaker, and essentially it’s going to make a few 
changes to foreclosure proceedings. More specifically, there’s 
some significant changes being made to the pre-action process 
with respect to foreclosure proceedings, and the minister, in his 
remarks when he provided his second reading speech, talked 
about how the changes are meant to simplify the process. So 
I’m curious to ask, and I’m looking forward to having the 
opportunity to ask some questions of the minister about the 
consultation that went on with respect to this bill and what 
we’re seeing in terms of similar types of legislation in other 



May 7, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4225 

jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
From what I understand, there was a report made by the Law 
Reform Commission a few years ago that sought to implement 
some changes in this legislation to help modernize the 
foreclosure proceedings in the province, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 
also curious to know what pieces of the Law Reform 
Commission’s recommendations have yet to be implemented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to ask a few questions just to ensure 
that we still have a process, a foreclosure proceeding process, 
that’s fair for both borrowers and lenders, Mr. Speaker. But in 
particular we want to make sure that we’re . . . Because 
borrowers tend to, as an advocacy body, have less of an impact 
sometimes when we’re talking about changes legislatively . . . 
To make sure that there’s still a level of fairness and due 
process for those borrowers because when we’re talking about 
foreclosure proceedings, it’s a very significant proceeding for 
an individual to have to go through. Taking away, removing 
someone’s home, their shelter, the roof over their head is a very 
significant step to do against another individual. 
 
So we want to ensure that the process that we have is fair and 
equitable, Mr. Speaker, especially when we’re talking about 
foreclosures. And the amount of mortgages in arrears in 
Saskatchewan right now are quite — quite — astonishing. And 
I’m looking at some data from a compilation of banks that have 
the percentage of mortgages in arrears for three or more 
months, and the Canadian average right now, Mr. Speaker, is 
point two four per cent. But here in Saskatchewan we’re over 
triple that actually at point seven six per cent, Mr. Speaker, 
which is quite a significant number. 
 
We’re actually the highest number in the country, even higher 
than the Atlantic provinces, Mr. Speaker, which is quite 
astonishing. And it speaks to this government’s failure to 
stimulate the economy, the problems that we’re hearing from 
people around the province in terms of trying to maintain jobs 
and well-paying jobs, Mr. Speaker. Not only that but when 
we’re talking about this legislation and legislative changes to 
foreclosure proceedings, it’s particularly astute in this province 
that we are ensuring that our foreclosure proceedings are fair 
and equitable. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m looking forward to having the opportunity 
to ask questions of this bill to the minister and his officials, so 
at this time I’m ready to allow this Bill 103 to move to 
committee. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the minister that Bill No. 103, The Land Contracts 
(Actions) Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 103, The Land 
Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 be committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 111 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doke that Bill No. 111 — The 
Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to add 
some remarks with regards to Bill 111 today. And this is a 
really important bill, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve been contacting a 
lot of stakeholders already and getting some information for this 
because this is a pretty important bill. 
 
When we talk about municipal tax sharing, we saw in the last 
budget that when the government just instantly decided to no 
longer honour their contracts with municipalities with the 
grants-in-lieu and people started worrying about if this Act will 
also be looked into. 
 
So this is regarding the potash revenues and so the intent with 
creating this system was that municipalities that lived near 
mines were able to benefit from the municipal tax collected 
from the potash mines and to ensure that there was proper 
redistribution of the tax revenue sharing. And so that’s why 
within this Act they established the Municipal Potash Tax 
Sharing Administration Board. And so within the changes to 
this legislation there’s going to be some adjustments to the 
board that’s responsible for receiving the municipal taxes 
collected from the potash mines and redistributed to 
communities that are within a 20-mile radius. 
 
One of the initial changes, Mr. Speaker, is that they’re going to 
be changing it from miles to kilometres within the language of 
the bill. So I know I understand kilometres more so than miles, 
but growing up in a farming community I understand what 
miles are as well. But that might be why there are some changes 
with regards to that. 
 
Originally, Mr. Speaker, the board consisted of two SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] 
representatives and one municipal government official. And so 
with changes to this Act they are proposing to have a SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] 
representative and a potash representative also on board. 
 
And so I think this is a really good start, Mr. Speaker. I know 
this is something that the municipalities and these organizations 
have been asking for, is to have more representation on this 



4226 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2018 

board that represents all of the individuals that are involved. 
And I think this would also increase some transparency as well 
and so people feeling that they’re being represented. So like I 
said, I think it’s a good start. And we can re-evaluate in years to 
come to see if maybe having potentially more members or not is 
something that should be looked into. 
 
Board members have a term of one year and so with changes 
with this legislation they’re going to move it from one year to 
two years, which I think provides a little bit of stability. I’m 
going to be asking the minister some questions with regards to 
what those will look like. Will these two-year terms alternate? 
Some agencies do that so that they can provide some stability 
with regards to their board members. And also learning about 
how often there are some vacant positions available, how often 
do they replace board members, how often do they meet. I have 
a lot of questions with regards to that. 
 
[15:30] 
 
So the minister indicated that they consulted with stakeholders, 
both potash and municipal. And so I know one of the concerns 
that have been brought to my attention when I’ve been doing 
my consultation as well is that cities is not included with this 
distribution area, and they’ve been wanting that. 
 
They changed the definition of “urban municipality” within the 
changes with this legislation, and they added resort villages. 
And so resort villages were seen as being seasonal homes, 
properties that weren’t used year-round, so they weren’t 
included in the initial definition. But with changes to this 
legislation they are now added because they realize that in these 
resort villages there are residents that are requiring more 
long-term services, and so they felt that it would be good to 
include them with the distribution of this potash revenue. 
 
So I think, again, this is a good start but I know that SUMA and 
the urban municipalities have been advocating to have the cities 
also included under that urban municipalities definition. So 
there’s definitely some questions to be asked with regards to 
why that’s not being included. Also now that resort villages are 
within the definition of urban municipalities, will that mean that 
there will be other changes with regards to how they pay 
municipal taxes and what that’s going to look like with regards 
to potentially more education taxes or some other taxes that I 
know that individuals have been inquiring about. 
 
They also made some changes with this legislation to include 
the new mines because we know that we’re going to get a new 
potash mine outside of Humboldt, which is exciting for the 
province, and so they wanted to make some changes in here to 
allow for that addition. And so that’s good news. 
 
There’s a new subsection to allow for new additions whether it 
be equipment, buildings, or other taxable items to be added to 
the revenue remitted to the board for redistribution to 
municipalities. And I guess that was something that was done 
before, but not consistently, and so this provides some better 
level of clarity. So there’ll be some questions with regards to 
asking about how that will work. And the new section clarifies 
that tax tools are prohibited but incentives are not, and so 
municipalities can continue to apply discounts to tax on potash 
mine assessments. So that’s another change, Mr. Speaker. 

And so, like I said before, this is a really important amendment 
to this Act. There’s some really good changes in here, but I 
don’t think there’ll be a lot of discussion about . . . But there are 
some areas that I’ll have a lot more questions to ask to the 
minister, so at this time, I’m going to cease my remarks and 
send the bill to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the minister that Bill No. 111, The Municipal Tax 
Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate Bill No. 111, The Municipal 
Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 113 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doke that Bill No. 113 — The 
Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is another Act 
that is being amended, that will impact municipalities. And so 
it’s been one that I’ve been looking through quite thoroughly 
and will be having some more discussion with stakeholders 
because, like I said before, this is a really important piece of 
legislation and some of the changes here are going to have a 
great impact on municipalities. 
 
So some of the changes here that I’ve noted is that this is going 
to improve Saskatchewan’s land use planning framework, and 
it’s supposed to potentially save money. And so there isn’t 
much detail of who does it save money. Does it save money for 
the municipalities? Does it save money for the province? And 
so there’ll be a lot of questions with regards to that. 
 
This helps municipalities plan regionally, support opportunities 
for municipal and provincial infrastructure to service 
department, clarifies a planning process for the use of municipal 
revenues for school purposes, and adjusts miscellaneous items. 



May 7, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4227 

And so there’s a lot of discussion here, Mr. Speaker, with 
regards to how the changes in this bill will help this government 
with regards to creating schools within municipalities. And so 
some of the comments that the minister indicated was that they 
want to promote having schools being built on municipal land 
and that in 2014 there was nine joint-use schools that were built 
on municipal reserve, which saved $36 million in land 
acquisition costs. 
 
I think it’s really important that we get a breakdown of those 
numbers and understanding if municipalities receive any benefit 
with regards to allowing this land to be used by the education 
system and financially. Because I think municipalities have 
been very friendly and worked really closely with other 
agencies within our government. But we’ve got to be mindful, 
Mr. Speaker, that in the recent years municipalities have been 
greatly impacted with the cuts from this government, cuts to 
funding and cuts to different programs that they had and that 
they were given, and now we hear that they’re going to make 
some changes with the revenue-sharing formula. 
 
So we know that municipalities also though have to keep their 
books in balance, and their community members are going to 
expect certain services delivered to them because that’s what 
their taxes are going to. So I think we have to have a little bit 
more discussion with regards to that, on how much this is going 
to impact the municipal sector. 
 
There’s regional partnerships make it easier . . . We know that 
regional partnerships make it easier and more cost-effective for 
municipalities to grow together. So it sounds like this 
government is looking at encouraging municipalities to go into 
more of a regional aspect. And so this helps provide some 
flexibility with municipalities to plan regionally and manage 
areas of common interest, which I think has been something 
that all levels of municipal sectors have been embracing. We’re 
Saskatchewan; we all work together and we know our 
neighbours are our neighbours and we like to work in common 
grounds. So it’s nice to see that the government is looking at 
that as an aspect as well. 
 
But again we have to look at how do we as the provincial 
government help these municipalities build these relationships 
together on a common ground and not have some of these 
agreements maybe impact different municipalities more than 
others, and how can we maybe help them work better together. 
So there’ll be some discussion on that. I know there’s been 
some areas that have done more with regards to that than others. 
 
There’s also . . . to require municipalities to have land-use 
planning policies for development, like by railway operations; 
streamlining the process for approving authorities to enter into 
development levy agreements; improving procedures of the 
Sask Municipal Board’s planning appeals committee; and 
modernizing the maximum fee for appeals to local development 
and appeal boards. 
 
So that is a lot of different changes there, Mr. Speaker, and so I 
think it’s really important that we look at each and every one of 
them to see how that’s going to impact municipalities. So will 
this cost municipalities more for staffing costs? How much is 
this going to impact them? And I think with the fee raising from 
$50 to $300, about how many people will that impact? How 

many stakeholders will see that increase? So I think those will 
be some really good questions on how many people pay that fee 
and what that will look like. 
 
The minister continues to have the ability to require 
municipalities to amend their official community plan to be 
consistent with provincial interests. I know this is something 
that they felt was important to keep within this legislation, so 
how often has this been happening? How often does the 
minister step in to municipalities and ask them to readjust 
their community plans? Those are going to be some really 
good questions to ask. 
 
There are many changes throughout this bill that will impact 
municipalities and how they can plan, develop, and address 
regional issues, Mr. Speaker. And like I said before, I’ll be 
certainly having some discussions with municipalities and other 
stakeholders, and about how this bill will impact them, and 
follow up with the minister in committee. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I cease my remarks and allow this 
bill to go to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 113, The Planning and 
Development Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. 
Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 113, The 
Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017 be committed 
to the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 115 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 115 — The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
rise this afternoon to enter some remarks regarding Bill 115, 
The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act. Now this is an 
interesting piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, and I talked about 
it a little bit when I was speaking about the cannabis bill. 
There’s a few pieces of legislation that are coming forward this 
session that deal directly with the pending legalization of 
cannabis. This is one of them, and I’ll just summarize a little bit 



4228 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2018 

what this bill is seeking to do. 
 
So this bill will give landlords new powers to make rules “. . . 
prohibiting the possession, use, selling or distribution of 
cannabis or the growing and possession of cannabis plants . . .” 
It also gives the Office of Residential Tenancies hearing 
officers new powers to refuse to allow an application from a 
tenant who is in contravention of an ORT [Office of Residential 
Tenancies] order. So this is a provision that’s not related to 
cannabis, so I’ll move back actually to the original, the first 
point that I was talking about. 
 
So this, like I said, this bill will allow landlords, if they choose 
to, to make rules around whether or not tenants can possess, 
use, sell or distribute cannabis, and grow or possess cannabis 
plants, Mr. Speaker. We’ve heard some concerns and I think 
there are some pretty legitimate concerns about what happens 
for individuals who are tenants of a residential property where 
the landlord has restricted the possession, use, selling or 
distributing cannabis, and in particular use, Mr. Speaker, when 
it’s also not allowed per the cannabis control Act to use 
cannabis in public. So it really limits where people can use 
cannabis. Although it will be, again I stress, a legal substance. 
Mr. Speaker, there is nowhere that an individual who is a tenant 
can actually consume cannabis unless they’re lucky enough to 
have a friend who owns their own property, or they have a 
friend who lives in a rental unit where the landlord hasn’t 
created these rules. 
 
[15:45] 
 
I also have some questions around allowing a landlord to make 
a rule around prohibiting possession of cannabis in particular. I 
think the argument that was made at the time of the introduction 
of this bill is that we want to be able to treat — by we, I mean 
the landlords want to be able to treat — cannabis similar to 
tobacco, Mr. Speaker, and how the use of cannabis can 
sometimes have a negative effect on other people who live in a 
rental complex, Mr. Speaker. Like if it’s an apartment-style 
complex, how difficult that can be if one person is using 
cannabis in their home, how quickly it can radiate into other 
units, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But possession is a different thing. Now I understand 
potentially why there would be rules around giving the landlord 
authority to tell someone whether or not they can smoke 
cannabis in their rental unit, but use cannabis can also include 
baked products, Mr. Speaker, which has no negative effect on a 
neighbour. And possessing . . . making rules around whether or 
not you can possess cannabis too, Mr. Speaker, seems a little 
extreme when it will be legal to have that substance. There is no 
rules around whether or not you can possess tobacco. 
 
So there are some points here where the argument that it should 
be equitable to tobacco stray, Mr. Speaker. So we’re going to be 
asking a lot of questions around that, whether or not there are 
some concerns around Charter rights here and whether they 
think it’ll stand up, whether there’s been some legal advice on 
to whether or not it’ll stand up any potential challenges. 
 
Moving along, this bill . . . It also gives the Office of 
Residential Tenancies, like I said, hearing officers new powers 
to refuse to allow an application from a tenant who is in 

contravention of an ORT order. And it also forces tenants to 
continue to pay their rent for the duration of the appeal process 
when appealing the ORT’s decision to grant the landlord 
possession of a rental unit for rent arrears, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the final point that this bill is seeking to accomplish is the 
last one that I want to really touch on, which allows landlords to 
dispose of property worth less than $1,500 without an order 
from the ORT when a tenancy ends or property is abandoned. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have been hearing some concerns from 
stakeholders in the province and so has my colleague, the 
member from Saskatoon Fairview who is our housing critic, 
about this portion of the bill, as well as the cannabis portion that 
I have already spoken to. 
 
But there are some pretty legitimate concerns about the power 
that this is providing. And what we’ve been hearing are the 
problems around landlords, because the provisions around how 
property is deemed to be valued at a certain price allows for 
some landlords to essentially value a lot of things under $1,500 
and then seek to dispose that property, Mr. Speaker. Some of 
the rules around how . . . The notice provisions aren’t very 
stringent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there are some pretty serious concerns about the power that 
that’s going to have on folks. One instance in particular that 
we’re thinking about when we’re thinking about someone who 
has abruptly ended or had to abandon property, are in situations 
of domestic violence, Mr. Speaker, and how devastating that 
can be for a tenant when their property can be destroyed by the 
landlord, Mr. Speaker, with a very low bar in terms of attempts 
made to reach the individual who is the owner of that property, 
Mr. Speaker. Sometimes, for many folks, that property that they 
left behind are the only pieces of property that they have, so it 
can be quite devastating to an individual when that property is 
disposed of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m going to be asking quite a few questions around that 
provision as well as that first provision around rules around 
cannabis in rental units. Mr. Speaker, I think these are important 
discussions that we’re having and I and my colleague, the critic 
for housing, have already received quite a bit of feedback with 
respect to this bill. So I’m looking forward to putting those 
concerns on the record and asking some further questions of the 
minister and his officials at committee. So at this time I am 
prepared to allow Bill 115 to move forward to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 115, The Residential Tenancies 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 



May 7, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4229 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 115, The 
Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017 be committed to 
the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 
Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Bill No. 125 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Harrison that Bill No. 125 — The 
Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to rise 
today to provide some thoughts on Bill No. 125, The 
Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act. This bill 
creates a 15 per cent non-refundable tax credit for value-added 
agriculture facilities on new capital investment. 
 
Companies are going to be required to apply for, to the 
government, for a certificate which is a SVAI certificate, 
Saskatchewan value-added agriculture incentive certificate, 
which just rolls right off the tongue. In order to be eligible for 
an SVAI certificate, an applicant must invest at least $10 
million in new capital and submit to inspections from 
government officials to ensure that all the rules are being 
followed. And redemption of the benefits is limited to 20 per 
cent in year one after the facility enters operation, 30 per cent in 
year two, and 50 per cent in year three, Mr. Speaker. There will 
be a maximum carry forward of 10 years on any remaining 
credit amount. 
 
I started to ask a few questions in committee about this 
particular bill, Mr. Speaker, but the bill had not yet been 
introduced. So I asked about some of the particulars about how 
this incentive will create jobs as that’s one of the claims that’s 
presented in the budget, Mr. Speaker. I asked about other 
models for tax incentives that have been used and whether there 
was a particular model that this was being shaped after. And so 
I was looking to find out if there were, if there’s some precedent 
of creating this tax incentive and evidence that creating a tax 
incentive like this does lead to jobs in the industry. 
 
So I think those are some important questions and that I will 
have an opportunity to ask those questions in committee. And 
we will have questions about the evidence that is provided here, 
the consultation that took place in drafting this bill, Mr. 
Speaker. But I’m happy to allow this bill to move to committee 
so that we will have an opportunity to ask those questions and 
to hear back from the minister on what some of the rationale 
was for creating this incentive, Mr. Speaker. So I’ll keep my 
remarks brief and allow this bill to move on to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 115, The Residential Tenancies 
Amendment Act, 2017 be now read a second time. Pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I 
would like to have a do-over. 
 
The question before the Assembly is a motion by the minister 
that Bill No. 125, The Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture 
Incentive Act be now read a second time. Pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 125, The 
Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act be 
committed to the Standing Committee on Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Economy. 
 

Bill No. 126 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Eyre that Bill No. 126 — The Energy 
Export Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to be able to rise in the Assembly today and enter into 
the debate on Bill No. 126, An Act respecting Energy Exports. 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, this bill is fairly new on the scene 
here in the Assembly and was brought in very quickly — a 
couple weeks ago, I believe — in order to address a current 
issue that is facing the people of Canada right now, and some 
disputes, interprovincial disputes. Yes, it was brought in on 
April 24th, 2018. 
 
And I know that this is a reaction to some of the events that we 
see taking place in Alberta and British Columbia right now and 
obviously having a very significant impact on our ability to sell 
Saskatchewan oil products at the best price that we can. And we 
know the differential is great and it’s one that is impacting our 
industry as it now stands. So this is a critical debate in our 
nation and certainly we see the stakes, what’s at stake for the 
provinces of Alberta and British Columbia. 
 
And the vexing problem of getting pipelines built in this 



4230 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2018 

country is one that’s really hurting our industry here in Canada. 
So I think it’s understandable to see the debate unroll as it has, 
and certainly concerns on both sides of the issue that are being 
represented by the provinces of British Columbia and Alberta. 
And obviously the product, the diluted bitumen that’s being 
proposed to be shipped in the new Kinder Morgan pipeline is a 
product that needs to get to market in order to be viable, and of 
course concerns about the content of that diluted bitumen is one 
that’s also up for discussion. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I think we need to look at this bill as it 
stands here in Saskatchewan and, you know, it’s going to have a 
serious impact, if it comes to fruition, on current business for a 
number of producers, oil and gas producers and refineries here 
in Saskatchewan. So there’s a lot of questions about who this is 
going to impact, how many jobs will be impacted by it if it 
comes to fruition. It seems to have cooled down a little bit now, 
Mr. Speaker, as Alberta hasn’t moved forward with its bill 
recently. 
 
But we know that the end of May is the deadline that’s been 
imposed by the pipeline company, Kinder Morgan, and there’s 
a lot of speculation about that deadline as well and what’s 
motivating that and whether Kinder Morgan is serious or not or 
whether they’re getting cold feet for other reasons. So lots of 
opinions out there to sort through, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I had the opportunity to listen to Michael Enright on Sunday 
morning a couple weekends ago, and it was sort of a primer for 
people of Canada who weren’t really sure what the issues were. 
And I found that to be really useful. And there was a very 
helpful speaker on that program. 
 
So I think this is something we need to continue to learn and 
listen from and ensure that, you know, the people of 
Saskatchewan’s best interests are continuously put out front. 
And whether or not this bill does that, I think is a matter of 
debate. And obviously I think we have questions. So certainly 
we’re going to want to look at that when we get to the 
committee on this bill. 
 
One of the things I found very interesting was kind of the key 
phrase in the Alberta bill and its similarities in the 
Saskatchewan bill. There are some clauses that have been 
copied verbatim from the Alberta bill, and there are several 
clauses that were written presumably locally here by officials 
who understand the . . . For example, the definition of oil in 
Saskatchewan is a very particular definition and has been 
refined — no pun intended — throughout the years. And so that 
definition has remained rather than the definitions being used in 
the Alberta bill. 
 
It’s highly technical, and I think when you rush the passage of a 
bill like this, there is opportunities for error to be present. So I 
think this is something we need to take a very, very close look 
at with the officials once we have an opportunity to discuss it in 
committee. 
 
The one section I do want to talk about today is in the Alberta 
bill. It’s section 2(3), and in the Saskatchewan bill it’s section 
3(3), and just noting that there’s actually two parts to this. 
 
[16:00] 

And the first part of the bill in Alberta says, before they make 
an order to stop, for example, flowing oil and gas to BC [British 
Columbia] it says they will do so having regard to, and this is 
(a) of the clause: 
 

(a) whether adequate pipeline capacity exists to maximize 
the return on crude oil and diluted bitumen produced in 
Alberta, [and] 
 
(b) whether adequate supplies and reserves of natural gas, 
crude oil and refined fuels will be available for Alberta’s 
present and future needs. 

 
And in Saskatchewan’s clause . . . So that’s in Alberta’s Act is 
2(3)(a) and (b). Saskatchewan’s clause is clause 3(3) and this is 
in (b). So (3) says: 
 

In making a recommendation for the purposes of the 
section, the minister . . .  
 
(b) must have regard to whether the proposed designation 
is, in the minister’s opinion, in the public interest, 
considering all or any of the following matters: 

 
(i) whether adequate pipeline capacity exists to 
maximize the return on oil and gas produced in 
Saskatchewan; 
 
(ii) whether adequate supplies and reserves of oil, gas 
and refined products will be available for 
Saskatchewan’s present and future needs. 

 
And the only reason I raise that today, Mr. Speaker, is because 
I’m interested in the first part of those considerations . . . Sorry, 
the second part of the considerations. The first part is what the 
debate is about — adequate pipeline capacity. So we know what 
that debate is. 
 
But it’s the second piece that I find very interesting, and this is 
whether or not Alberta in their Act, or Saskatchewan in our Act, 
has adequate supplies of oil, gas, and refined products for 
present and future needs. So this is something I do want to ask 
the minister about and the officials when we get to committee 
is, if this bill passes, this means that we could actually stop 
flowing oil under any contract, if we need it more here in 
Saskatchewan. And I know that much of our oil and gas is 
spoken for already through contracts. So I’m finding that that is 
something I really do want to be able to have a good discussion 
on is whether . . . Like the bill I think goes much further than 
what was attempted . . . or what the public debate is about 
today, which is pipeline capacity. This second clause actually 
takes it much further than that. So we’re going to have 
definitely questions about that, Mr. Speaker, as we go into the 
committee discussion on this, and we’ll be interested to see 
what the minister has to say about that. 
 
But at this point, you know, it’s a highly political bill. I think 
it’s a moving target and I think we will see, as the next couple 
weeks roll out, whether or not this bill will need to be passed. 
Perhaps Kinder Morgan and the federal government, who’s 
responsible for pipelines, will sort out something that will allow 
this project to go forward. So we’re hoping that the federal 
government will step up and do what they need to do, and so 



May 7, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4231 

provinces aren’t drawn into these nasty discussions. But until 
then we will continue to debate the bill and hopefully have an 
opportunity in committee to discuss it. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have anything further to 
add to the bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the minister that Bill No. 126, The Energy Export Act 
be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill 126, The Energy 
Export Act be committed to the Standing Committee on 
Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Economy. I recognize . . . Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I would like leave to move a motion to 
adjourn the House so committees may sit tonight. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this Assembly now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:04.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Question Out of Order 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 4207 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4207 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4207 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4208 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4208 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4208 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4209 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4209 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4209 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Hindley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4209 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4209 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4209 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4210 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4210 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Nursing Week 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4210 
 Mental Health Week 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4210 
 Saskatoon Chapter of Executive Women International Officially Chartered 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4211 
 Locals Only Initiative Launched in Saskatoon 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4211 
 Walk a Mile in Her Shoes Event Held in Melfort 
  Goudy ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4211 
 Memorial Service for the Battle of the Atlantic 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4211 
 KidSport Month 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4212 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Privacy Protections for Youth in Gay-Straight Alliances 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4212 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4212 
 Delivery Services Within Health Care System and Transport of Patients 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4213 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4213 
 Privacy Commissioner’s Recommendations Concerning Global Transportation Hub 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4213 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4214 
 New Hospital for Prince Albert 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4214 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4214 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4214 
 Land Acquisition for Saskatoon Freeway 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4215 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4215 
 People With Disabilities Working in Government 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4215 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4216 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4216 
 Transition to National Job Bank Website 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4216 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4216 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4217 
 
 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Interim Supply 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4217 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4218 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
 Bill No. 130 — The Appropriation Act, 2018 (No. 1) 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4218 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 76 — The Parks Amendment Act, 2017 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4219 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 4220 
 Bill No. 82 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2017  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4220 
  Brkich (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 4221 
 Bill No. 86 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2017 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4221 
  Brkich (referral to Human Services Committee) ................................................................................................................. 4222 
 Bill No. 89 — The School Choice Protection Act/Loi sur la protection du choix d’école 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4222 
  Brkich (referral to Human Services Committee) ................................................................................................................. 4223 
 Bill No. 90 — The Heritage Property Amendment Act, 2017 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4223 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 4224 
 Bill No. 103 — The Land Contracts (Actions) Act, 2017 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4224 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 4225 
 Bill No. 111 — The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Amendment Act, 2017 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4225 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 4226 
 Bill No. 113 — The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2017 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4226 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 4227 
 Bill No. 115 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2017 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4227 
  Brkich (referral to Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee) ............................................................................ 4229 
 Bill No. 125 — The Saskatchewan Value-added Agriculture Incentive Act 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4229 
  Brkich (referral to Economy Committee) ............................................................................................................................. 4229 
 Bill No. 126 — The Energy Export Act  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4229 
  Brkich (referral to Economy Committee) ............................................................................................................................. 4231 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


