


















































May 8, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 55A  TUESDAY, MAY 8, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4233 
 May 8, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to this Assembly, it’s my privilege to introduce to 
you in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, some representatives from the 
MS [Multiple Sclerosis] Society. We’d like to acknowledge all 
the good work that they do, Mr. Speaker. We have in your 
gallery Dr. Michael Levin who’s a neurologist and 
Saskatchewan’s first MS research Chair. We have Erin Kuan, 
the president of the Manitoba-Saskatchewan division of the MS 
Society of Canada. We have director of government relations, 
Jessica MacPherson, and we also a couple of volunteers that are 
no stranger to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, Brian Duck and 
Eugene Paquin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to meeting with them later this 
afternoon. They’re also going to be hosting a reception for all 
members of the Assembly at about 5 o’clock, I think. We look 
forward to that. Mr. Speaker, again I would just like to thank 
these representatives of the MS Society for all the good work 
that they’ve done, and wish them well. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
ask all members to please welcome them to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the minister to welcome the guests from the MS 
Society here today to their legislature. It’s always a pleasure to 
have an opportunity to sit down and chat with them as I did this 
morning, and I look forward to the reception a little bit later 
today, but to hear about some of the work that their 
organization is doing, but work that’s ongoing here in 
Saskatchewan to tackle MS. The work that they do around 
advocacy, to make sure that MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] know the lay of the land and what we could be 
doing as legislators to better support their work, is always very 
valuable. The support that they provide to families . . . Their 
awareness is always very much appreciated. So with that I’d 
like to ask all members to join the opposition as well in 
welcoming these guests to their legislature. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, although I don’t know their 
names, today is World Ovarian Cancer Day, Mr. Speaker, and 
I’m sure that there will be an introduction on the other side of 
the House. But I just want to acknowledge their presence. 
Today is . . . Sorry, my voice is still not 100 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to recognize the folks here today who are here 
for World Ovarian Cancer Day. It’s an important day around 
awareness and education of this disease that takes far too many 
women because people aren’t always aware of the risks and 
don’t always get that early screening. So I want to thank them 
for their presence today and appreciate the work that they do in 
raising awareness and bringing education to this issue as well. 

So I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming these guests to 
their legislature as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you to all members of this Legislative 
Assembly, I’d like to join with the opposition Health critic, Mr. 
Speaker, in welcoming all guests here today, but welcoming our 
guests from Ovarian Cancer Canada here today, Mr. Speaker. I 
see they’re wearing their Walk of Hope shirts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Walk of Hope is a fundraiser for ovarian cancer and an 
awareness raiser for ovarian cancer, Mr. Speaker, held in cities 
across the nation, one that my wife and I’ve had the opportunity 
to participate over the last number of years, Mr. Speaker. As we 
all know, every day in this nation five women lose their battle 
with ovarian cancer. Ten years ago, Mr. Speaker, one of those 
women was my mother-in-law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with us today from Ovarian Cancer Canada we 
have Ann Chase. We have Cindy Rottenbucher. We have Keith 
Doering. And we have Wayne and Enid Young, Mr. Speaker, I 
think joining us here today. Mr. Speaker, through you and to 
you to all members of this Legislative Assembly, I ask all 
members to welcome our guests. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — With leave for an extended introduction, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you, I would like to take this opportunity to 
recognize the recipients of this year’s Agriculture Student 
Scholarships, seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan Agriculture Student Scholarship is an important 
part of the Ministry of Agriculture’s commitment to developing 
young agricultural leaders. 
 
Each year the Government of Saskatchewan recognizes four 
people for their passion and dedication to agriculture. This 
year’s applicants were required to submit a video or essay based 
on their own personal food story. Again this year there were 
many exceptional submissions from young individuals from 
across the province. 
 
This year’s winners are bright, eager, innovative, and are 
leaders among their peers. It is young individuals such as these 
who will drive the future success of the industry. Their passion 
to share their own personal agricultural story with others is 
inspiring and helps build public trust in the industry. I’m 
confident they will succeed in whatever they set out to 
accomplish. 
 



4234 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2018 

I ask the scholarship winners to please stand as I announce their 
names: Emma Hinz of Humboldt, Saskatchewan. Emma has 
been awarded the Grand-Prize Scholarship of $4,000 to put 
towards her agricultural studies. Emma’s winning essay 
submission discusses how her unique dietary restrictions have 
shaped her food story and helped her recognize the importance 
of agriculture advancements. Emma will be attending the U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan] in the fall to study Animal 
Bioscience. 
 
Our three runner-up winners of this year’s program were each 
awarded $2,000 to put toward their agricultural studies. The 
winners, in no particular order, are Laura Carruthers of 
Frenchman Butte who will be attending the U of S in the fall to 
work toward her Bachelor of Science in Agribusiness, Kati 
Culbertson of Redvers who will also be attending the U of S in 
the fall to work toward her Bachelor of Science in Agribusiness, 
Crystal Daniel of Avonlea who will be attending Lakeland 
College to work towards her diploma in Animal Science 
Technology. 
 
Laura is passionate about sharing her food story. She’s excited 
about the future of agriculture and is eager to be part of an 
industry that feeds the world. 
 
Kati cares deeply for animals. By using innovation and 
technology, Kati ensures that her animals are healthy and are 
raised using sustainable practices. Her goal is to pursue a career 
that focuses on the production of livestock. 
 
Crystal understands the impact agriculture has on the world and 
values the advancements that the industry has made to ensure 
the production of safe, sustainable beef. She also understands 
how hard our producers work, as she lives it every day. 
 
Thank you to each of you for your hard work and dedication to 
the agriculture industry. I ask all members to join me as I 
congratulate these four individuals on this outstanding 
accomplishment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to my fellow 
members, I would like to introduce a group of special students 
visiting the Legislative Assembly today. They are seated in the 
west gallery. 
 
Joining us today are 34 students along with their teachers, 
chaperones who have travelled from eight northern 
Saskatchewan high schools. They are here from the 
communities of Black Lake, Cumberland House, Dillon, La 
Loche, La Ronge, Deschambault Lake, Southend, and Stony 
Rapids. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the students are here to participate in the 
educational program known as the Charles Knight Youth 
Mentorship Program. This is the ninth year of the annual 
program facilitated by the Provincial Capital Commission. The 
program provides high school students from northern 
Saskatchewan with an opportunity to learn about our 
democratic processes and to explore post-secondary educational 
and public sector career opportunities. 

During their four-day stay, they will tour the University of 
Regina, the First Nations University of Canada, Saskatchewan 
Polytech Regina Campus, and the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] training academy. Mr. Speaker, the member 
from Regina Rochdale; the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport; and the member from Athabasca had a chance to visit 
with these students, and a member will have more to say in a 
member’s statement. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in with the 
minister and just to bring some welcoming remarks to the 
northern students that are here. Again to the leadership from the 
communities of the North, to our students, our teachers, support 
staff, to the Provincial Capital Commission, I want to thank you 
for arranging this, organizing it. I know it’s not easy. 
Sometimes it’s a challenge getting us together too. 
 
So I just want to take an opportunity to welcome the students. 
This is your Legislative Assembly. We’re here serving you. It is 
an honour. You’re getting an education. Today you will get an 
education while you are in here. Some will say different things 
about it, but I want you to watch as we, as opposition, try to 
hold the government to account as the role we’re supposed to, 
advocating. So I just want to say welcome; hope you get a good 
education. Question the ministers. If you get a chance to talk 
with them, ask them some tough questions. With that, I will say 
welcome to your Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your gallery, I 
would like to introduce a constituent, Don Ewart, whom I’m so 
pleased to have with us today. Don is the president and founder 
of Advanced Labour Solutions, which is celebrating its 20th 
anniversary this year as a Saskatchewan business, Mr. Speaker. 
He’s developed some industry-leading human resource and 
management assessment and development programs, is a highly 
skilled negotiator and trainer, and is the architect of the positive 
employee program, which has proven to significantly reduce 
staff turnover. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he’s also served as a member of the Saskatchewan 
Labour Relations Board, vice-president of the Saskatchewan 
Administrative Tribunals Association, of the Saskatoon public 
school boards, a foundation board, past president of the 
Saskatoon Crime Stoppers board, and of the Saskatchewan 
chapter of the Canadian Association of Professional Speakers. 
Please join me in welcoming Mr. Ewart to his Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to also stand in my place and join the minister, as well as 
my colleague from Cumberland, and welcome all the students 
who are here to visit the Assembly and learn how politics work. 
I’m especially proud of the students that came all the way from 
Black Lake and Stony Rapids. Just to get to P.A. from Black 
Lake is a 12-hour drive. Then of course they very fortunately 
flew to Saskatoon, but many of them have taken that trip on that 



May 8, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4235 

horrible road. With that being said, Mr. Speaker, I won’t get 
into politics today other than to welcome the students here and 
to point out to them that you are the best and we hope you all 
the bright fortunes in your future. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I also want to 
welcome all the students of course, but to also welcome one of 
the teacher chaperones, Rhonda Watchel. Rhonda Watchel is 
the first cousin to my wife, Beckie. And she’s originally from 
Buffalo Narrows but now lives in La Ronge. And she warned 
my wife over and over about those guys from Ile-a-la-Crosse, 
but the charm was too much for Beckie to resist. 
 
But nonetheless, Mr. Speaker, I want to welcome my wife’s 
first cousin, Rhonda, and all her students from the east side and 
the west side, and to point out that she’s a wonderful teacher, a 
great cousin-in-law, and one of the great northerners that we 
should certainly honour and appreciate each and every day. To 
all the students, welcome again to your Assembly. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
In Cree, I’m so glad that they’re here, and you have nothing to 
fear here. Congratulations, and welcome once again. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar-Sask 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Alsask, Eston, 
Kindersley. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition to 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to provide trapping 
licences exemption for residents 65 years or older. That trappers 
are a very important group of people that maintain traditional 
values in Saskatchewan; the fur harvesting industry provides 
many economic benefits to the province; the province has 
exemptions for fishing licences for residents over 65 years or 
older, but there are no age exemptions for trappers yet. 
 
And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to immediately show their 

support for Saskatchewan trappers and provide a trapping 
licence exemption for Saskatchewan residents over 65 
years of age. 

 
It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 
so present. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to stop 
the Sask Party attack on our kids’ already strained classrooms. 
Those who have signed the petition today wish to draw our 
attention to the following: that the Sask Party cut $54 million 
from our kids’ classrooms in the devastating 2017-18 budget; 
that the 2018-19 budget only restores a fraction of last year’s 
devastating $54 million cut; and even though the Sask Party is 
making us all pay more, our kids are actually getting less. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, these cuts are having devastating 
impact across the province and students will lose much-needed 
support in their classrooms, including programs to help children 
with special needs. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the government to fully restore the senseless cuts to our 
kids’ classrooms and stop making families, teachers, and 
everyone who works to support our education system pay 
for the Sask Party’s mismanagement. 
 

Mr. Speaker, those who have signed the petition today reside in 
Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. And 
the people signing this petition want to bring to our attention the 
following: that Saskatchewan’s outdated election Act allows 
corporations, unions, and individuals, even those living outside 
of the province, to make unlimited donations to our province’s 
political parties; that the people of Saskatchewan deserve to live 
in a fair province where all voices are equal and money can’t 
influence politics.  
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan politics should 
belong to Saskatchewan people; and that the federal 
government, the provinces of Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, Nova 
Scotia, and now British Columbia have moved to limit this 
influence and level the playing field by banning corporate and 
union donations to political parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask Party to 
overhaul Saskatchewan’s campaign finance laws, to end 
out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations from 



4236 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2018 

corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit on 
individual donations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Regina and Lumsden. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise today to present a petition calling on the government to 
restore the rental housing supplement. These citizens wish to 
bring to your attention that the rental housing supplement helps 
people living with disabilities and low-income families pay 
their rent; that the Sask Party’s elimination of the rental housing 
supplement hurts low-income families and people with 
disabilities; that those who currently receive the supplement 
have no assurance that a change in circumstance won’t lead to 
their loss of the supplement; that this cut comes after previous 
cuts to the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] 
program have already affected hundreds and left people living 
with disabilities with fewer supports; and that rents remain 
unaffordably high for many, since the cost of living has 
increased significantly in the last decade while social services 
benefits have remained unchanged. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to immediately restore the 
Saskatchewan rental housing supplement. 

 
This particular petition is signed by individuals from Regina, 
Mr. Speaker. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 
my place once again to present a petition around Orkambi. 
Whereas Orkambi is the first drug to treat the basic defect in the 
largest population of Canadians with cystic fibrosis. It can slow 
disease progression, allowing patients to live longer, healthier 
lives. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people that urge the Ministry of Health 
have the following prayer: 
 

To negotiate a fair price for Orkambi and to make it 
available through the Saskatchewan drug plan for those 
who meet the conditions set out by Health Canada and the 
clinical criteria established by the Canadian CF clinicians. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the many, many, 
many pages of petitions, as I’ve presented over time, are from 
all throughout Saskatchewan and throughout the country. And 
the people that have signed this particular page, Mr. Speaker, 
are from Lloydminster as well as Neilburg. And I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

World Ovarian Cancer Day 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
acknowledge May 8th as World Ovarian Cancer Day. Mr. 
Speaker, every year approximately a quarter of a million 
women around the world are diagnosed with ovarian cancer, 
including an estimated 2,800 Canadian women. Every day in 
Canada approximately five women lose their battle with this 
terrible disease. Ovarian cancer is the seventh most common 
cancer among women and the deadliest, with a five-year 
survival rate of just 45 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ovarian cancer often goes undetected until it has 
progressed to an advanced stage, as early symptoms are subtle 
and often confused with less serious conditions. It is important 
that women be proactive in their physical health and well-being 
to help detect this disease as early as possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must all play a part in protecting our sisters, 
mothers, daughters, and friends by providing education and 
raising awareness on the most serious gynecological cancer. We 
are all affected by this devastating disease, and we are all in this 
fight together. That is why I am proud to see the members of 
this Assembly wearing teal ribbons in support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in supporting those 
who have defeated ovarian cancer and supporting those who are 
fighting this awful disease. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

North American Occupational Safety and Health Week  
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize North 
American Occupational Safety and Health Week, held from 
May 6th to the 12th this year. Also known as NAOSH, the 
week is intended to drive home the message that workplace 
injuries impact everyone. We must do whatever we can to 
reduce harmful and life-changing workplace incidences to zero. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the goal during this safety and health week is to 
focus employers, employees, partners, and the public on the 
importance of preventing injury and illness in the workplace, at 
home, and in the community. This week several activities are 
taking place as part of the awareness campaign. This provides 
an opportunity to empower workers to take concrete steps in 
securing their own protection, while promoting a workplace 
culture of balance between individuals and employers. 
 
Even though many companies see the value in managing their 
occupational health and safety responsibilities, it often takes a 
serious workplace injury or fatality before organizations 
understand the real costs of cutting corners. NAOSH week is a 
celebration of the safety work that takes place all year long and 
reminds us that safety should be considered a priority every 
week of the year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the North American health and safety week’s 
goals require commitment from workers of all ages and 
abilities, but also employees, employers, and government. 
Workers deserve to be safe, and we must collectively stand for 
nothing less. Thank you. 



May 8, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4237 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 

Fundraising Walk for Multiple Sclerosis 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was my pleasure to 
bring greetings on behalf of the government to the 20th annual 
Jayman Built MS Walk in Lloydminster this past weekend. We 
in Saskatchewan have some of the highest rates of MS in the 
world, but events such as this are taking positive steps in 
finding a cure for this terrible disease. For many years, the MS 
Society has been providing hope and support as well as 
important research and innovations to families and patients 
affected by multiple sclerosis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after Brett Coe was diagnosed with MS, he 
reached out to the society right away and they helped both him 
and his family adjust to his diagnosis. They assisted Brett and 
his wife, Chelsey, in educating their two children on multiple 
sclerosis by providing educational resources as well as sending 
them to a kids’ camp where they would learn more about what 
their dad would be going through. The Coe family was in 
attendance on Saturday and are now part of the walk committee 
for the MS Society. 
 
This year’s event had 466 registered walkers, including myself, 
and so far has raised approximately $77,000. And that number 
is expected to continue to grow. Mr. Speaker, I now ask that all 
members please join me in congratulating the Jayman Built MS 
Walk on another successful campaign, as well as thank the 
incredible staff and volunteers for putting on a great event. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Early Childhood Education Month 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today and join 
my colleagues in recognizing May as Early Childhood 
Education Month. May 9th has also been proclaimed as Early 
Childhood Educator Appreciation Day. 
 
The purpose is to recognize the thousands of early childhood 
educators who contribute to the physical, emotional, spiritual, 
and intellectual development of our children. Early Childhood 
Education Month reminds us that positive experiences for 
young children continue to help them throughout their lives. 
 
Play is an essential part of childhood experiences because 
children bring meaning to their understanding of the world 
through play. Through play, children are further able to develop 
physically, socially, emotionally, spiritually, and intellectually, 
so they are better able to enjoy health and well-being into their 
adult years. 
 
New Democrats know how important the fight for education is, 
and we will continue to stand shoulder-to-shoulder with parents 
and educators in the efforts to force the Sask Party to fully 
restore the devastating cuts they have brought forward in the 
past two years, including cuts to pre-K [pre-kindergarten] 
programs. 
 
We know that every dollar invested in quality early years 
education returns 4 to $9 in lifetime savings. It is important to 

understand that short-sighted cuts have real impacts for 
students, parents, and teachers, and it’s time that we as a 
province step up and fully invest in the quality early childhood 
education that our children deserve. Mr. Speaker, what an 
excellent time to acknowledge the many early childhood 
educators who work in centres and communities around 
Saskatchewan, and I invite all members to join me in 
celebrating early childhood education and educators. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rochdale. 
 

Charles Knight Youth Mentorship Program 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise in this Assembly and acknowledge a fantastic 
initiative, the Charles Knight Youth Mentorship Program. For 
the ninth consecutive year, the Provincial Capital Commission 
is once again hosting 34 high school students from northern 
Saskatchewan. The students have travelled to the provincial 
capital to learn more about Saskatchewan’s history and 
government. In addition, the students will discover further 
information about post-secondary opportunities available to 
them in this province. 
 
Their visit to Regina will include multiple tours across our 
capital city, as well as meeting with the Lieutenant Governor, 
MLAs, and other community leaders. Now that’s a lot to fit in 
to four days, but, Mr. Speaker, I have no doubt that these 
students are determined to learn as much as they can. To be 
accepted into the program, each had to write an essay saying 
why they are interested in the program and how they will 
demonstrate leadership in their school and in their community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program was built to encourage future leaders 
from northern Saskatchewan. And when I, along with the MLA 
from Sask Rivers, had the pleasure of meeting with these 
students, we can say very strongly there’s no doubt we have 
future leaders here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the entire Assembly, I want to 
congratulate all the students on being accepted into the 2018 
Charles Knight Youth Mentorship Program. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Wedding Anniversaries 
 
Ms. Lambert: — I rise in the House to acknowledge two 
couples in my constituency who celebrated 65th wedding 
anniversaries this past year. Mr. Speaker, Eugene and Alice 
Bader were married on February 28th, 1953. They called 
Rosthern home for 26 years, with Eugene working in plumbing 
and heating, and Alice bookkeeping for her husband’s business. 
They raised three children: Janine, Lorna, and Darryl. 
 
I had the opportunity to meet them at the Scott Forget Towers 
90th birthday tea in March. Alice played piano at the tea. She 
started to learn piano just 10 years ago. Eugene is a guitar 
player and was a member of three dance bands over the years: 
the Polka Dots, the Range Riders, and Mel’s Music Men. 
 



4238 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2018 

Mr. Speaker, the second couple to celebrate this anniversary is 
Howard and Dorene Thomas, who were married on June 29th, 
1952. The couple spent their career operating a mixed farm on 
land that Howard’s father bought in 1909 just north of Vanscoy. 
It was mainly a grain operation and they also raised cattle. 
 
The couple welcomed six children throughout their marriage: 
Melvin, Donald, Belle Marie, David, Carol Lyn, and Murray. 
Tragically Melvin, aged 14, and Donald, aged 16, perished in a 
hotel fire in Smeaton in 1973. David still works the family 
farm. Over 100 people joined them in celebrating their 
anniversary this past summer in Delisle. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate both of these couples on 
their 65 years of marriage. They are testaments of true love and 
dedication to family and to each other. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 

Family First Radiothon in Moose Jaw 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Congratulations to 
800 CHAB Family First Radiothon on their 12th annual 
fundraising campaign in support of the Moose Jaw Health 
Foundation. This year they had a target of $125,000 but 
exceeded that goal very quickly. They raised $209,856 during 
the 36-hour live radiothon held last Thursday and Friday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the broadcast was a chance for patients and 
families and health care professionals to share their stories and 
testimonies about the health care in Moose Jaw. Mr. Speaker, a 
thank you goes out to all donors but especially to Cecil Smith, 
who donated $18,452 in memory of his wife who had recently 
passed away. Thank you as well to the Moose Jaw Health 
Foundation legacy fund for donating $30,000 for the radiothon. 
And the Fox family who made a final donation to the 
fundraising campaign with a cheque for $75,000 in memory of 
Al and Bernice Fox who were great supporters of the 
foundation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year’s funds will go toward the travelling 
endoscope cart, the glidescope, the defibrillator, and surgical 
cart for surgeons, physicians, and nurses at the F.H. Wigmore 
Hospital in Moose Jaw. 
 
I ask all members to please join me in congratulating 800 
CHAB Family First Radiothon on a successful event and thank 
the many volunteers, organizers, and donors for their impact in 
the community of health care in Moose Jaw. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Just before we get to question period, I’ll 
remind members to refer to the members opposite: this is the 
government; this is the opposition. I’ll accept Sask Party 
government. I’ll accept NDP [New Democratic Party] 
opposition. Anything else, no. 
 
So you’ve been warned. Good luck. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

New Hospital for Prince Albert 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when 
seeking the leadership of his party, the Premier ran on his 
predecessor’s promise to build a new hospital in Prince Albert 
with 100 per cent provincial funding, and committed to do so 
within the next three years once the budget was balanced. Well 
now the Premier’s promising a balanced budget by next year. 
Yet in his tours with the Finance minister last week, he backed 
away from any timeline for that hospital, saying vaguely, the 
timeline will be when we can afford it. Yet the Finance minister 
told community members last week that she believed a new 
hospital for Prince Albert would be the next major 
infrastructure project for this government. 
 
When asked about this discrepancy yesterday, the Premier listed 
several priority hospitals and other projects which might lead 
the people of Prince Albert and northern Saskatchewan to 
legitimately wonder where their community falls on that list of 
priorities. So to the Premier: what assurance can the people of 
Prince Albert have that this project will go ahead as promised? 
Or will the next Sask Party election campaign also include a 
promise for a hospital in Prince Albert? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Let me be very clear here, Mr. Speaker. The 
NDP opposition is wrong. Mr. Speaker, they are wrong in these 
assertions. Mr. Speaker, I have always said, whether I’m 
running in a leadership election or since, that we are on a 
three-year path to balance in this province, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’m proud to say that this Finance minister and the governing 
members on behalf of the people of the province, we’re on track 
to meet that balance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when we are able, Mr. Speaker, to meet that balance and 
ensure the fiscal capacity of this government is strong, we are 
going to continue to invest in hospitals across this province, Mr. 
Speaker, like we have over the last decade. And we’re going to 
continue to invest in the people that work in those hospitals, Mr. 
Speaker — the 900 more doctors that we have now, the over 
3,000 more nurses, Mr. Speaker. We will continue to invest in 
hospitals in Weyburn, in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. A 
long-term care facility needs to come in Meadow Lake because, 
Mr. Speaker, for 16 years previous, none of that happened in 
this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Changes to Rental Housing Supplement 
 

Mr. Meili: — Mr. Speaker, they say that empty barrels make 
the most noise, and whenever we’re not going to get an answer, 
we hear the Premier get a lot louder in his responses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, good housing is the foundation of good health. 
And as of July 1st of this year, the government will no longer 
be accepting applications for the Saskatchewan rental housing 
supplement. Vacancy rates have risen, but rents have not fallen 



May 8, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4239 

accordingly. Despite those higher vacancy rates, $7 a month — 
that’s how much rents have gone down, $7 a month on average. 
That’s certainly not enough to make life more affordable. When 
you can’t afford a home, Mr. Speaker, you can’t afford a home. 
It doesn’t matter how many are vacant. Some 50,000 
Saskatchewan households continue to struggle to afford 
adequate housing. 
 
What is this government’s plan to end homelessness, to ensure 
adequate housing in Saskatchewan, given this backward step of 
cutting the Saskatchewan rental housing supplement? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
As I’ve said in the House, and as I’ve said in committee, there’s 
lots of things that came to this decision, and again this isn’t a 
financial decision, Mr. Speaker; this is a policy decision. 
 
We have a huge surplus of Sask Housing on our market right 
now, Mr. Speaker. We have over 3,000 Sask Housing units that 
are not being used, Mr. Speaker — we want to utilize that — 
that combined with a very high vacancy rate. When the Sask 
rental housing supplement was introduced, Mr. Speaker, the 
vacancy rate was in and around 4 per cent. That actually 
dropped down to 1 per cent in 2012, and now it has climbed to 
9 per cent, Mr. Speaker. That, combined with our federal 
program that is coming online in the next . . . And we want to 
continue to work with our federal counterparts, Mr. Speaker. 
We think that this is the right decision. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Meili: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This clearly is not a 
financial decision because anyone can tell you that that $5 
million cut will cost a lot more in downstream costs in health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this cut is going to hurt the most vulnerable people 
in this province. Just take a look at the eligibility for the 
program. To receive the supplement, you must have recognized 
disability supports in your home, or children under the age of 
18. The decision to prohibit people who either have children or 
are living with disability from receiving support, it seems to be 
based on hopes for a yet non-existent federal homelessness 
strategy. Mr. Speaker, the federal government has not provided 
a timeline on this strategy or any details on the Canada housing 
benefit, which we know won’t kick in until at least 2020. 
 
So to the Premier: why would this government make such a 
decision? Why would you cut a program now, on July 1st of 
this year, when you have no idea what kind of help is going to 
come forward for the most vulnerable people in the province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. And I 
want to get on the record, Mr. Speaker, that nobody that is on 
this program right now will see any change as long as their 
eligibility remains the same, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As far as some of the comments that I do have, Mr. Speaker, is 
there is a comment that I’d like to be able to put on the record 
that was heard during the budget debate, Mr. Speaker, and it 

was: 
 

You know $50 million is a lot to pay in rental supplements. 
And if you look back in the comments I’ve said . . . And I 
expect . . . somebody throw this back to me. I’ve said . . . 
[there is a better way we could spend $50 million] in terms 
of building social housing, building seniors’ housing, 
building affordable housing. 

 
And who said that, Mr. Speaker? It was the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Discontinuation of Athletics Programs at the 
University of Regina 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — And of course they’re not doing any of 
that either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since November 2016, that government has cut more than $6 
million from the University of Regina’s budget. After the 5 per 
cent cut last year, programs were eliminated, tuition was hiked, 
and jobs were lost. And after last month’s austerity budget, this 
institution is left scrambling to deal with under-funding and cuts 
from that government. 
 
Under these pressures, the University of Regina has sadly 
announced that both the men’s and women’s wrestling 
programs and the men’s volleyball team will be eliminated. Mr. 
Speaker, student athletes are here today and our community is 
rising up to fight for these programs Does the Sask Party 
government recognize the damage that they’re causing with 
their cuts? And will they step up today to properly fund our 
universities and save these programs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. And I would like to welcome the members of the 
University of Regina wrestling team here to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, you know, the recommendations that 
came out of the athletics review came out in January of 2017. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s two budgets ago. And as a result of that 
engagement process, Mr. Speaker . . . I’d like to just list the 
number of individuals who were engaged in that process. They 
were the members of the University of Regina senior admin; the 
Faculty of Kinesiology and Health Studies administration; the 
University of Regina athletics; the University of Regina 
full-time coaching staff; the University of Regina external 
relations; the president of the Regina Rams Football Club; the 
members of community-based sport governing associations; 
University of Regina medical staff; student athletes; selected 
University of Regina community partners and supporters; and 
the broader faculty and university community members. I think 
one of the things that’s important here, Mr. Speaker, is that this 
was an engaged process. 
 
And I would also say that I’ve been in contact with Dean 
Riemer from Kinesiology and Health Studies. I’m very, very 



4240 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2018 

pleased to see that the university will be honouring the 
scholarship terms for these individuals. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — What a weak answer from that 
government, a government that’s cut our post-secondary 
institution, the University of Regina, by $6 million in less than 
two years, Mr. Speaker. For over those past two years they 
made the choice to offer cuts instead of supporting students. 
 
The U of R [University of Regina] wrestling program has been 
in place for over 30 years, and in that time has been the most 
successful athletic program in U of R history — national titles, 
international and Olympic champions, and an incredible legacy 
of sports development throughout our community. It’s a point 
of pride not just for our university, but for our province. 
 
The volleyball program has also been successful and is essential 
to supporting youth sport and high school sports throughout our 
community. How can the Sask Party stand by and force the 
elimination . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. Next question. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How can the Sask Party government . . .  
 
The Speaker: — Sit. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How can the Sask Party government . . .  
 
The Speaker: — Sit. You haven’t been recognized. I recognize 
the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — How can the Sask Party government 
stand by and allow for the elimination of these programs, to 
force the elimination of these programs as they foist cuts upon 
our university? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. As the member opposite knows, the universities are 
autonomous institutions, and they have the ability to make 
decisions about programming autonomously and irrespective of 
government. 
 
And I would also point out, Mr. Speaker, that we have provided 
$113 million this year to the University of Regina, which is 74 
per cent more than the members opposite ever did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have great empathy for the students as victims of this decision 
that the university of made. I am very pleased however, that the 
university is going to honour their scholarships’ terms. And I’m 
also, as I understand it, they will have a private meeting today 
with members of that administration, and I hope they get a lot 
of their questions answered, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, student athletes are here 
today, and they’re looking for answers from that government 

who have cut $6 million from the University of Regina in less 
than two years. These athletes aren’t just athletes; they’re not 
just numbers on a spreadsheet. They’re community leaders, 
potential Olympic athletes. They volunteer and help build sport 
within our community. 
 
Many of these students and alumni volunteer with at-risk youth, 
with students in high school programs all through our 
community, providing a positive direction for kids and healthy 
lives. Keeping one young person out of the correctional system 
saves the province $100 in just one year. This program itself, 
the wrestling program, runs for about $80,000. Mr. Speaker, the 
cost savings of these program cuts are minimal, but the cost to 
our community are immeasurable. 
 
Will the Sask Party government finally show some leadership, 
step up, and provide the proper funding to our universities and 
save these important and proud programs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Again, I have spoken with the dean and I’m very 
pleased that these students will have their scholarships 
honoured. I think that is the most important thing in this 
conversation. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, I would also say this, that it is 
very important to note that the dean of Kinesiology and Health 
Studies has indicated that all the savings that have been 
captured through this decision will be kept within the Faculty of 
Kinesiology and Health Studies, Mr. Speaker, which has 
experienced about a 31 per cent growth. This is an example of a 
faculty that is trying to direct resources to where they’re needed 
the most, Mr. Speaker, and I think that’s very important in this 
conversation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, there are 2,700 more students in our 
province’s schools, but because of the cuts there are fewer and 
fewer teachers. In 2016 the Sask Party failed to fully fund 
negotiated salary increases for teachers. Not only did this 
demonstrate the Sask Party government’s utter lack of 
commitment to the bargaining process, it left school boards 
with a huge hole in funding that they were unable to fill, and 
they were forced to make cuts, cuts to teachers and cuts to 
student supports. 
 
Can the minister acknowledge that when the Sask Party 
government fails to fully fund teachers’ salaries, it’s kids in the 
classroom who end up suffering? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
I’ve stated before on the floor of this legislature, in this year’s 
budget there was an additional $30 million that was provided to 



May 8, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4241 

support children in the classrooms, Mr. Speaker. And as the 
member opposite knows, those funds are provided to the school 
divisions unconditionally so that they can use those funds in the 
best way that they think is right to support children in the 
classroom, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That $30 million, Mr. Speaker, in additional funding was the 
annualized amount of the seven and a half million dollars that 
the Premier announced prior to the budget, Mr. Speaker. So that 
demonstrates our commitment to the classroom, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I continue to have ongoing consultations and discussions with 
school boards, Mr. Speaker. I met with another school board 
this morning, Mr. Speaker, so we can fully understand the 
challenges that the school divisions are having, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re committed to public education. We’re committed to 
ensuring that we provide the right supports in the classroom 
because we know, Mr. Speaker, that children are the future of 
this province and they deserve our support. And they’ll 
continue to get it from this government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, when there’s a shortfall in any line 
item of funding, it results in cuts to the classroom. And when 
school boards and teachers negotiate in good faith and the Sask 
Party government fails to fund that contract, it means that 
school boards are short money and they’re forced to cut. 
 
Yesterday when asked about funding the teachers’ salary, the 
minister said, and I quote, “I am not in a position to make that 
commitment.” So if the Minister of Education isn’t in a position 
to commit to funding teachers and subsequently kids’ 
classrooms, can you tell us who is? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, we were in estimates last 
night, Mr. Speaker, and I answered a number of questions that 
were asked by the member opposite, Mr. Speaker. And we’re 
going to continue to consider the estimates of the government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as I’ve stated before: once there is an agreement to 
consider, Mr. Speaker, the government’s going to examine the 
cost and explore the options with that, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
going to continue to look to see what options, what the needs 
are in the school division. And not just with respect to the 
teacher’s salary, Mr. Speaker, but with further supports in the 
classroom. 
 
And I’ve said on a number of occasions, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
going to look at the enrolment projections in the fall, Mr. 
Speaker, to consider what else we need to do to support 
children in the classroom. But that’s an ongoing conversation 
that we will have on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’ll have more to say about it when those decisions are made. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Provincial Sales Tax on Used Vehicles 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious that this government 

and that front bench have been comfortable with saying one 
thing and doing another. The Sask Party government’s flip flop 
on used cars will take nearly $100 million out of Saskatchewan 
people’s pockets at a time when they’re still grappling with last 
year’s billion-dollar tax hike, skyrocketing power bills, and 
even property tax increases. 
 
On top of all that, this government will even be taxing vehicle 
purchases that took place before the budget. Buyers don’t have 
a crystal ball to predict the whims of this government, Mr. 
Speaker. So how can the minister retroactively apply a new tax 
policy that buyers didn’t account for when they actually bought 
their vehicles? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the 
member opposite knows of someone that purchased a used 
vehicle in a private deal prior to the date of the PST [provincial 
sales tax] being applied to used vehicles, she needs to give a 
phone number to that person who can phone and if he or she has 
the bill of sale, there will not be PST. The PST will be rebated. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, buyers who made the decision to 
buy a vehicle before the budget did so with all the information 
that they had, but they’re stuck paying more than what they 
budgeted for, significantly more, because SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance] will be using the red book value to 
determine tax rates. 
 
They’re told they can challenge the price with the Ministry of 
Finance if they don’t like it — quite the runaround for a 
government that states that it’s committed to cutting red tape. 
People are frustrated, and rightly so. Will the government 
reinstate the PST exemption on used cars or, at the very least, 
will they get it right? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I believe perhaps, Mr. Speaker, that 
the member opposite didn’t hear the previous answer. If this 
person bought their vehicle prior to the PST being reinstated, 
then they only need to show their bill of sale proving that the 
purchase was before the date, and they will get their PST 
rebated. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Privacy Commissioner’s Recommendations Concerning 
Global Transportation Hub 

 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Minister for the 
GTH [Global Transportation Hub] wouldn’t commit to 
following the recommendations of the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner to release the documents journalists have been 
asking for. That’s a real shame, Mr. Speaker. These are public 
documents and the public has a right to know what’s going on 
at the GTH. 
 
The Information and Privacy Commissioner is an independent 



4242 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2018 

officer of this Assembly and he should have the final say when 
it comes to the release of public documents. But unfortunately, 
the commissioner doesn’t have the power to order the GTH to 
release those documents. Does the Minister for the GTH think 
that’s okay, or does he think it’s time we modernized the 
freedom of information Act, similar to what the member for 
Meadow Lake has said, to give the commissioner the power to 
order the government to release these records? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I answered the 
question for the critic. I explained to the critic yesterday how 
the law worked. It’s pretty clear that the critic should have 
thought about it before she posed the question. Now I have the 
question from the justice saying, well she didn’t like the answer 
that we gave yesterday because she now wants us to change the 
law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can’t just say, we don’t like this so change the 
law today, Mr. Speaker. As we go forward and we update 
various pieces of legislation, and that may be one that the 
members want to have some input or some comment on. 
 
But I can say this, Mr. Speaker: I’m glad that the members 
opposite went to the GTH. I’m glad that they went on a tour. 
I’m glad that they went inside the Loblaw facility. I’m glad that 
they saw that it was a 24-hour-a-day, 7-day-a-week facility; 750 
employees; employees from 47 different countries. Mr. 
Speaker, they’ll also have seen 60,000 containers moving 
through the CP [Canadian Pacific Railway] facility. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, this is what the member for 
Meadow Lake said during his big announcement on 
government accountability when he was doing his brief run to 
be Premier. He said, “I will reverse the onus in The Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act to require disclosure, 
on the recommendation of the commissioner.” 
 
Now I won’t say this often about the member for Meadow 
Lake, but I think he was really onto something here. Now these 
aren’t new powers. Information commissioners in Alberta, BC 
[British Columbia], Ontario, Quebec, PEI [Prince Edward 
Island], and Newfoundland and Labrador all have the ability to 
order the government to produce records, not just make 
recommendations. 
 
Doesn’t the government think Saskatchewan’s Information and 
Privacy Commissioner should be able to enforce these 
recommendations? What is the Sask Party government so afraid 
of? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, under the existing 
legislation, the GTH has one month to respond. They also have 
the ability to go back to the Privacy Commissioner and to have 
some discussion about what is, or what is not, commercially 
sensitive. That’s the process that I expect will take place. 
 

And what the members are asking for today is simply political 
opportunism, saying we’re afraid we might not like the answer 
later on, so now we’re asking you to change the law today. Mr. 
Speaker, there are laws. There are processes in place. Those 
will be followed, and we’ll respect the law on this side of the 
House, as we have in the past and as we will continue to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention to the members opposite 
that the GTH is a self-governing inland port. It’s similar to 
other inland ports in Canada and elsewhere. Its benefits include 
designation as a foreign trade zone. It’s its own taxing 
authority. It maintains autonomy. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s doing 
what it’s supposed to do. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Wait Times in Health Care 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The wait-list for surgery is moving in the 
wrong direction, Mr. Speaker, but that is just one step in the 
process patients go through to get the care they need. Before 
they can even get on the surgical wait-list, they need to see a 
specialist, and that wait-list is growing too. In 2012 this 
government committed to reducing wait times to see a specialist 
to one week, a goal this government is a far cry from achieving. 
Information from the Ministry of Health shows a 20 per cent 
increase in the average wait in just a single year to see a 
physician in the top 20 specialities. 
 
To the minister: what is stalling progress, and why are specialist 
waits getting longer? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
are concerned about the wait times for . . . to see a specialist 
have increased slightly, Mr. Speaker. We’re concerned with 
that. We think the best way to deal with that, frankly, is 
recruitment, Mr. Speaker. And you saw a news release last 
week that said 900 more doctors are practising in this province 
today, Mr. Speaker, than were in 2007 when we were given the 
privilege of forming government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, wait times in different areas, whether it be 
specialists, surgical wait times, Mr. Speaker, we’re extremely 
concerned about those. We’ve made great strides, Mr. Speaker. 
We recognize we have a lot more work to do but, Mr. Speaker, 
we believe we’re moving in the right direction. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Great strides, Mr. Speaker? He’s going the 
wrong direction, Mr. Speaker. This is a huge issue for people 
suffering, waiting for the care they need. Last year it took on 
average 224 days to see a neurosurgeon and 250 days to see a 
nephrologist. These are not worst-case scenarios either, Mr. 
Speaker. These are averages. 
 
Even at a time when the need for mental health supports are so 
great, people waited on average 162 days to see a psychiatrist. 
That’s more than five months, Mr. Speaker, to see a 



May 8, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4243 

psychiatrist. This was a key element of the government’s 
surgical initiative and it appears to have fallen by the wayside. 
What is the government’s plan to get these wait times for 
specialists under control? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, officials are looking at a 
number of options. We’re obviously concerned about this, as I 
said. Obviously recruitment is a huge part of this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member opposite spoke to wait times for mental health. 
We’ve discussed that in this Assembly on a number of 
occasions, Mr. Speaker. The wait times, especially in 
Saskatoon, are troublesome. We’re looking at options there. 
The wait times in Regina and Prince Albert are much better. My 
deputy minister some time ago had sent a letter to the CEO 
[chief executive officer] of the Saskatchewan Health Authority 
asking him to look at the processes that we followed in Regina 
and Prince Albert to rectify the situation in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the broad picture in health care, 
though, Mr. Speaker. The member opposite is picking different 
areas, and that’s valid when, in the case of specialists, the wait 
times have increased, Mr. Speaker. We’re concerned. But let’s 
look at the broad picture: 900 more doctors — you’re going to 
see an announcement very soon — far more nurses than when 
we formed government, Mr. Speaker, more long-term care 
workers. We know that we have a lot more work to do but we 
are moving in the right direction. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Requesting leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s a tremendous honour to introduce guests that 
are seated in the west gallery here today that are with us. These 
are student leaders, student athletes that have joined us here 
today. 
 
I want to welcome Jordan Tholl, who’s a graduate of O’Neill. 
That’s the captain right now of the men’s wrestling team for the 
U of R Cougars. He was second at Canada West in 2018. He’s a 
two-time junior national finalist. He’s an incredible performer, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s an honour as well to welcome Amber Wiebe who’s here 
today, the captain of the women’s team that’s here. She came 
from south of Winnipeg out of Morden, Manitoba. She’s a 
Canada West champion. She’s accomplished a U Sports bronze, 
junior national bronze, and is a Commonwealth Games second 
runner-up. 
 

I’d also like to welcome Lucas Hoffert that’s here today, team 
captain from 2015 all the way through to 2018. He’s a graduate 
of Miller high school here in Regina. He’s an academic 
all-Canadian four times over, Mr. Speaker, and this year won 
the president’s award — a very accomplished athlete. 
 
We’re joined here as well by Brett Kryger all the way from 
Moosomin. He’s a Canada West bronze medallist as well. 
 
We have Matt Fedler who’s here today, a friend and student 
leader, a 2014 MVP [most valuable player] and team captain, 
Canada West silver and bronze medallist, Mr. Speaker. He 
started wrestling out in Unity with Chris Kent, a friend as well 
and a former wrestler out of Thom Collegiate. 
 
[14:30] 
 
We also have Katelynn Kowalchuk that’s here today, the 
president of the Saskatchewan young New Democrats, a student 
leader, somebody who’s an important voice as well, an 
important voice to me around mental health for young people 
and all people. 
 
We’re joined as well by Evan Lemieux, a wrestler. I don’t have 
a whole bunch more information here, Evan. I apologize for 
that. Trey Lansdel and Christopher Busch are also here today. 
 
So I welcome all these folks for being here. I thank them for 
their important voice and I just thought their voice yesterday at 
that press conference was inspiring, Mr. Speaker. This is an 
important program. And I recognize Leo and Dan McGee and 
people like Ron Gonzales, and so many that have built that 
program. I ask all members of this Assembly to welcome these 
incredible student leaders and athletes to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to join with the member opposite in 
welcoming you to your Legislative Assembly. I would also like 
to offer the invitation, I would love the opportunity to sit down 
and have a discussion with you. If you’re interested after this, I 
can just meet you outside and we can have a chat. I’d love 
nothing more than to do that. So if you are interested, I’d love 
to see you. Thank you very much. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 129 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor that Bill No. 129 — 
The Saskatchewan Technology Start-up Incentive Act be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 



4244 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2018 

Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As ever, 
good to take my place in this Assembly, join the debate before 
us, and comment on the issues as they present. In this case 
we’ve got The Saskatchewan Technology Start-up Incentive 
Act. Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to rise and join debate 
on this particular new measure. It arises from the budget of 
course, and again there are a lot of things to recommend this 
particular initiative. This was part of the discussion we had last 
Thursday in this Assembly during private members’ motions in 
the 75-minute debate, Mr. Speaker, wherein the government 
was mightily interested in patting themselves on the back for 
this particular measure. 
 
And as I said at that time, I’ll say again, Mr. Speaker, you 
know, there’s a toolbox of public policy tools, initiatives, that 
are at the disposal of any government. Tax credits — 
refundable, non-refundable — are certainly one of those tools, 
Mr. Speaker, but a lot depends on what you’re doing with the 
tool. And as is the case with a hammer, you can be using that 
tool to be building or you can be using or misusing that tool, 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of destroying or harming something. 
 
And in terms of the track record of this government, I think it’s 
safe to say that there’s nothing in particular wrong with 
something like — say, I don’t know — the Global 
Transportation Hub. A perfectly fine idea, Mr. Speaker, capable 
of supporting jobs and logistics excellence, Mr. Speaker. But if 
you handle it like the government of the day is handling it, well 
then it starts to look like you’re not using that hammer to build 
something. You’re in fact using it to bludgeon something. And 
in terms of the way that this government acts on too many files, 
Mr. Speaker, and more and more all the time, again in terms of 
something that would seem to be reasonable on the face of it — 
the Saskatchewan technology start-up incentive — we’ll see 
how this plays out on the ground. 
 
Now in terms of the actual details of the legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ll certainly look forward to having a more detailed 
conversation in committee and going at greater length and 
gaining a finer understanding of what’s on offer. In particular 
we’ll be looking for, you know . . . The government would 
seem to be indicating there are a number of corporations that’d 
be able to advantage themselves with this particular measure. 
 
We’ll be looking to get information from the government in 
terms of how many . . . You know, what they’ve got this 
booked as an expenditure in the budget. Is it the 5 million that is 
entailed in this subvote of the Finance estimate (FI12), or is it 
some other way evidenced in the estimates, Mr. Speaker? 
Where did they arrive at that particular figure? How many 
corporations do they think will be available or will be eligible 
for this particular measure, Mr. Speaker? What do they think 
will be generated in terms of economic activity? What do they 
think will be generated in terms of job creation, Mr. Speaker? 
What do they think will be facilitated in terms of the generation 
of intellectual property and the commercialization of that 
intellectual property, Mr. Speaker? 
 
These are a lot of questions that we will be seeking answers for 
in committee when we have that more, as is often said in this 
Chamber, that more fulsome discussion, Mr. Speaker. Not that 

. . . Well we’ll see. We’ll see how that discussion goes. 
 
As regards the overall use of targeted tax initiatives on the part 
of this government, more broadly put, Mr. Speaker, I note in the 
past two budgets alone, we’ve had measures brought forward 
by the government that ultimately, I think, saw zero in terms of 
expenditure.  
 
So in terms of those measures hitting the mark that was set out 
for them or the very unique sort of profile of those measures, 
Mr. Speaker, it was evident that whatever the government was 
offering, that it didn’t quite hit the mark. So you wonder if is it 
what happened with Kal Tire at the GTH, Mr. Speaker? Is there 
something like that has gone on where the government, you 
know, couldn’t help themselves and managed to screw up a 
good opportunity for the province, Mr. Speaker, and misused 
the tool that is inherent in this piece of legislation. We’ll see 
again how that plays out over time. 
 
We do know again, that in the past two budgets there have been 
specific initiatives brought forward using tax credits as an 
incentive, Mr. Speaker, that have resulted in precisely nothing. 
So we’re not hoping for that of course, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
hopeful, positive, optimistic people, Mr. Speaker. We want to 
see good things for the province. And certainly the tech sector 
is a great thing in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and not just 
Saskatoon which, as was noted by the minister, is second only 
to Waterloo in terms of regions of economic activity and 
development on the tech sector, Mr. Speaker, but also certainly 
throughout the province. 
 
And again there’s an infrastructure here that is, you know, in 
other regions I’m sure would be construed as Saskatchewan’s 
connectivity advantage in terms of all the great work that’s been 
done by SaskTel in conjunction with the people, the men and 
women of this province, but the way that that particular 
infrastructure benefits the people of the province. 
 
I also think of the great work that’s done under the aegis of the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, Mr. Speaker, and the 
research parks, be it the Terrace or Innovation Place. And 
certainly some of the very industries cited in the minister’s 
second reading speech of May 1st certainly have been part of 
that nurturing community that is on display in those research 
parks, Mr. Speaker, where the commercialization of intellectual 
and innovative development takes place. 
 
So we’ll see that . . . We’ll be interested to see if what they’re 
putting forward here, if it does in fact have a positive impact, a 
helpful impact, Mr. Speaker, if it’s used at all; if it’s misused, as 
arguably was the case with previous offerings in this very 
sector, Mr. Speaker, on the part of actions of that government. 
And we’ll also be interested to see if anybody takes them up on 
it. Because again, we know that in terms of other particular 
initiatives, it’s a light in the window, but not a lot of heat being 
generated, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in terms of doing the work in committee, I’m looking 
opposite for the . . . I guess I’m going to look to my colleagues 
to take us to committee on this particular piece of legislation, 
Bill No. 129, The Saskatchewan Technology Start-up Incentive 
Act, so that we might have that, that more detailed and 
thoroughgoing discussion at that stage of this particular bill. 



May 8, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4245 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 129, The Saskatchewan 
Technology Start-up Incentive Act be now read a second time. 
Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 129, The Saskatchewan Technology 
Start-up Incentive Act be committed to the Standing Committee 
on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 124 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 124 — The 
Environmental Management and Protection (Environmental 
Handling Charges) Amendment Act, 2018 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise to enter into this debate on Bill No. 124, An Act 
to amend The Environmental Management and Protection Act, 
2010 respecting environmental handling charges, and it’s quite 
a handle. It’s a very short bill, very important though. 
 
You know, in Saskatchewan we take a lot of pride in how we 
deal with our recycling, particularly when it comes to different 
containers. We have a long history, some 30 years or more, of 
having a good recycling ethic here in Saskatchewan. It is very 
positive and it’s one that I know both sides of the House 
support. 
 
And we have a really good partner with Sarcan who’ve done 
some outstanding work in terms of leadership to be effective 
stewards, and really have come to understand the issues that 
surround recycling. And I can say, as a former minister, that we 
look to them for leadership and their insights or comments, 
whether we were talking about recycling paint, electronic 
goods, a whole host of things, that they would have a good eye, 
a good way to approach this that ordinary people in 
Saskatchewan would say, hey that makes a lot of sense and we 
need to continue that. 

But I do have some comments here because it’s a piece of 
legislation that can be very confusing in terms of that many 
people don’t understand all the charges that are on a container, 
and that you may end up paying fees and taxes and that kind of 
thing that you didn’t really expect when you would be in a 
certain type of store, you know. There’s even a difference 
whether you buy a 1-litre milk or 1-litre juice in a grocery store, 
a bigger store than, say, what’s designated as a small container 
of juice in a convenience store. 
 
For example, the convenience store scenario, you would have 
someone buying a small container of juice, and they may be just 
popping in to buy some things for lunch the next day. Well they 
would be paying now an increase in PST, a 1 per cent increase, 
thanks to last year’s budget going from 5 per cent to 6 per cent.  
 
They would also be paying an increase in the deposit. And quite 
often we think of the deposit as really basically a flow through: 
the customer buys a pop or a can of something or whatever and 
there’s a deposit on it. And you pay that up front, and whether 
it’s 5 cents a container or 10 cents a container, you’re eligible to 
get it refunded to you if you take it to Sarcan. So it’s really you 
get the whole deposit back. You get the whole deposit back. 
 
Now interestingly last year, not this year but last year’s budget 
saw an increase in that deposit. And so it’s one of those things 
that happens where you, you know, the government says, well 
we’re not making any money off that because that’s just a flow 
through; we’re holding that money for when people come to the 
Sarcan and they’ll get their money back. Fair enough. Fair 
enough. That’s true. But the fact is, and we are a really good 
province for recycling, but the fact is we don’t all take our 
bottles back. We don’t all take our containers back. So some 
money is left. Some people do. Some people do, yes. But some 
people don’t. I think the number is about 85 per cent; 85 per 
cent of containers are recycled. So that means 15 per cent aren’t 
recycled and that money stays with the government. 
 
[14:45] 
 
So in this case we know, and we’ve got answers to this, that the 
government collects somewhere between 55 and $60 million in 
terms of the deposit. So if they get to keep 15 per cent, this 
money flows into the GRF and then comes out of the GRF to 
Sarcan when they have to . . . when they make their claims of 
who’s come forward with their containers. That 15 per cent is 
some $9 million, Mr. Speaker. That is significant. That is 
significant. 
 
Now the other thing that happened last year when we saw the 
deposit increase . . . two things happened actually. One was 
interesting. One was that there was an increase in terms of 
almost a doubling of that deposit. Now I don’t know who was 
asking for that deposit to be increased, but that’s more money 
flowing out, maybe more money flowing in. But clearly, more 
money was staying with the government because we know that 
there was significantly more money that the government would 
be able to keep. 
 
The other thing that happened last year — and this is a good 
thing — is milk containers and milk-kind of containers became 
eligible for deposits. So they had to pay for their environmental 
handling charges and the deposit charges. 



4246 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2018 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked about two and now I want to talk 
about the third charge that’s on these containers, and that is the 
environmental handling charge. And we know that the 
government has collected on average about 25, $26 million 
dollars last year. It’s $27 million that they had collected for 
environmental handling charges for beverage containers. And 
that’s a significant amount of money. And that is what they will 
use to negotiate contracts with Sarcan, because clearly Sarcan 
cannot make it just . . . I mean, there’s no money in the deposit 
because the deposit is a flow-through. They act as agents for 
people to get their deposit money back. 
 
But who is paying for the buildings, the power, all those other 
things, and the wages of the people who work at Sarcan? And 
clearly those have gone up. And we understand there’s 
negotiations going on, and hopefully those negotiations will be 
done well. 
 
But what’s interesting is, this 2 cent increase in the 
environmental handling charge leads to the promise that the 
government has made that 1 cent will go to Sarcan. That’s 
worth about 5 million. And that 1 cent will stay with the 
government in the GRF [General Revenue Fund]. So that’s $5 
million. So if you take that $5 million and then you add the $9 
million because of the retained or unclaimed deposits on 
beverage containers, you’re up to 14 million. And then if you 
add that 1 per cent that’s been added to it, so all of a sudden 
you’re starting to see we’re in the 15, $17 million ballpark of 
new money. 
 
Now interestingly the Leader-Post, in an article that was March 
23rd, when the government did a bit of a pre-budget release of 
fees, called this the “Bottle drive.” And you know, of course the 
deficit is much bigger than some 10, $15 million, and this is not 
going to be really . . . put that big of a dent into the debt that 
this government is developing. 
 
But it’s interesting that many people don’t understand there’s 
been three hits. So when you go to a convenience store and you 
pick that bottle of juice up for your lunch tomorrow, there’s 
been three hits on that container that wasn’t there two years 
ago: the PST has gone up on it, the deposit’s gone up on it, the 
environmental handling charge has gone up on it. I don’t think a 
lot of people in Saskatchewan, when they think about the cost 
of living, go, “This has happened.” 
 
And this is sort of that kind of — how did the Regina city 
councillor call it? — thief-by-night type of thing where you 
come in quietly and you do this kind of, kind of without a lot of 
fanfare. And people have a right to know, and I don’t think 
they’re quite aware that all these things are going up a little bit 
here, a little bit there, a little bit here, a little bit there. And all 
this is leading to a very high cost of living in Saskatchewan for 
some people who really don’t . . . who have some real serious 
concerns about where their money is going and how this 
government is managing it. Who asked for the increase in the 
bottle deposit last year? Who asked that it would go up from 5 
cents to 10 cents? 
 
Now maybe they’ll get their money back. And I see members 
over there raising their hands that they will be participating in 
that, they’re going to get their money back. And that’s good. 
Good for them, because that’s exactly positive environmental 

stewardship. But we know 15 per cent of the funds are not 
collected, and that gets to stay in the GRF. 
 
So we will have lots of questions about this bill in the 
committee, because this is complex and it’s not straightforward, 
and I think consumers in Saskatchewan aren’t aware of how 
these folks are nickel-and-diming them, literally, literally when 
it comes to beverage containers. And it’s not just one way, it’s 
just not two ways, but it’s three ways. 
 
And I think that they have a lot to answer for about what are 
they going to do with this extra money that really they’re just 
holding onto. But boy they sure can find different ways to do it 
that are questionable, or maybe not in the best interests. But we 
know that they are piling higher interest on the debt and they 
have to find a way to make these things happen, so we’re 
talking about 14, $15 million-plus that they’re now accruing 
that they weren’t two, two and a half years ago. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude my remarks. We’re 
willing to see this bill go to committee. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 124, The Environmental 
Management and Protection (Environmental Handling 
Charges) Amendment Act, 2018 be now read a second time. 
Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
designate that the Bill No. 124, the environmental management 
and protection amendment Act, 2018 be committed to the 
Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 114 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 114 — The 
Vehicles for Hire Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to enter into Bill No. 114, an Act respecting vehicles 
for hire and consequential amendments to other Acts. A very 
important piece of legislation before us, as we know, that the 
minister who introduced this really framed this as an issue, an 



May 8, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4247 

opportunity, an innovation to deal with drinking and driving. 
That in Saskatchewan this may be an opportunity for vehicles 
that we typically don’t think of that would be working in rural 
Saskatchewan or small cities, and we’re talking about Uber or 
Lyft and those types. 
 
It’s an interesting piece of legislation, because we see Uber and 
Lyft coming under a lot of questions in other major cities about 
whether their employees that work for their . . . And we had our 
own circumstance, our own tragic circumstance where we now 
have seen, twice, drivers being injured in their course of their 
work as taxi drivers here in Regina, and the gap between WCB 
[Workers’ Compensation Board] and SGI and what that really 
means. 
 
And so this is one that will be interesting when we get to 
committee with questions about this, because really we’ve seen 
the minister present information that really portrays the 
alternate vehicles for hire as an attractive choice, but we have a 
lot of questions about whether he’s fully considered the 
question of taxis. 
 
And this has been a long-standing tradition around the world 
and we know this is really a domain of municipalities, that 
they’re the ones who license and develop bylaws around taxis 
and vehicles for hire. And so this action by the Minister for SGI 
to enter into this caught a few people off guard. We’re always 
aware that he’s trying to make things better in terms of curbing 
drinking and driving, but the logic here has left many people 
wondering what’s the real intention here and will it actually 
help. We see a government that has increased the number of 
outlets for alcohol throughout the province, but at the same time 
is caught up in the quandary of what to do about drinking and 
driving. 
 
We worry a lot about the issues around the drivers, particularly 
how important it is in Saskatchewan in all sorts of weather and 
all sorts of road conditions, and whether or not this will actually 
meet the needs of someone who finds themselves having drank 
a little too much, and it’s Friday night or it’s Saturday night or 
maybe it’s Monday or Tuesday night in a small town in 
Saskatchewan looking for a ride home. Is this really going to be 
the work that they need to do? 
 
So the government does set out some ideas. Of course, clearly, 
drivers must have a driver’s licence, vehicles must be 
registered, a transportation network company must prove they 
have insurance. Now this is again the question: do they have 
insurance? They hopefully, obviously, for the vehicle, for the 
passengers, but will they have insurance for the drivers? This is 
where we’re finding the gap when it comes to drivers that were 
injured here in Regina. There was no insurance and there was 
no requirement for them to have insurance for their drivers. 
 
And somehow the question became, well if they are not the 
owners, are they employees? And you know, we were of the 
belief that if you’re an employee, the onus is on the employer to 
make sure you have the workers’ comp insurance in place 
before you start. You can’t sort of go halfway, then have an 
accident and then say, well now I want to have workers’ comp. 
You’ve got to have it before you start if you’re an employer in a 
company. 
 

So government has regulating powers defining vehicles, 
prescribing classes of driver’s licence, that type of thing. Again 
though, I think that it’s important that we think about what are 
the communities, what do they want to have for this kind of 
thing? And I think that, as I’ve said, you know, taxi companies 
have developed for decades, decades, really know their 
communities and they can protect both the public and the 
drivers in the circumstances that we have. 
 
And we have situations right now where the drivers are asking 
for Plexiglas to separate the passengers from the drivers to 
avoid the kind of tragic accidents we’ve had where knives have 
been used. Even on, even on, I believe the accident happened on 
a Friday morning shortly after 9 a.m. where you would think, 
you would not think at that point in time that there would be a 
challenge. So, Mr. Speaker, we are not saying no to ride 
sharing, but the regulations must be in place, must be in place to 
ensure the safety of consumers, of drivers. 
 
And I think that’s the role of the provincial government, and we 
want to make sure it works. This is not about picking winners 
and losers. And in this question, this type of thing, it sounds 
very much like that might be the case where the minister has 
made up his mind. And we’re worried about, what are the 
unintended consequences when you see a government that has 
made up its mind and is not looking fully at the consequences 
and looking at a broad range of research, not just from one or 
two areas, but a broad range of research. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be looking forward to seeing 
this in committee, but I do know that many others on this House 
will want to speak to this. So this one is a bill that I will now 
move adjournment on, Bill No. 114. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Centre has moved 
adjournment on Bill No. 114, The Vehicles for Hire Act. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
facilitate the work of committee both this afternoon and this 
evening, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It was moved that this Assembly be now 
adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Agreed. Carried. This Assembly now stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 pm. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:00.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4233 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4233 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4233 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4233 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 4234 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4234 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4234 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4234 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4243 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4243 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4235 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4235 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4235 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4235 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4236 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4236 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 World Ovarian Cancer Day 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4236 
 North American Occupational Safety and Health Week  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4236 
 Fundraising Walk for Multiple Sclerosis 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4237 
 Early Childhood Education Month 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4237 
 Charles Knight Youth Mentorship Program 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4237 
 Wedding Anniversaries 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4237 
 Family First Radiothon in Moose Jaw 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4238 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 New Hospital for Prince Albert 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4238 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4238 
 Changes to Rental Housing Supplement 
  Meili ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4238 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4239 
 Discontinuation of Athletics Programs at the University of Regina 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4239 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4239 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4240 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4240 
 Provincial Sales Tax on Used Vehicles 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4241 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4241 
 Privacy Commissioner’s Recommendations Concerning Global Transportation Hub 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4241 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4242 
 Wait Times in Health Care 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4242 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4242 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 129 — The Saskatchewan Technology Start-up Incentive Act 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 4244 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to Economy Committee) .................................................................................................................. 4245 
 



 

 Bill No. 124 — The Environmental Management and Protection (Environmental Handling Charges) 
 Amendment Act, 2018 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4245 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to Economy Committee) .................................................................................................................. 4246 
 Bill No. 114 — The Vehicles for Hire Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4246 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


