


















































May 14, 2018 Hansard


 

SECOND SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Mark Docherty 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 59 NO. 58A  MONDAY, MAY 14, 2018, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
2nd Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Mark Docherty 
Premier — Hon. Scott Moe 

Leader of the Opposition — Ryan Meili 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Hon. Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Francis, Ken — Kindersley (SP) 
Goudy, Todd — Melfort (SP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Hindley, Everett — Swift Current (SP) 
Kaeding, Hon. Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 

Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 
Makowsky, Hon. Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Meili, Ryan — Saskatoon Meewasin (NDP) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Mowat, Vicki — Saskatoon Fairview (NDP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
Vacant — Regina Northeast 

 
 
 
Party Standings: Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 48; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 12; Vacant — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
  within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 4283 
 May 14, 2018 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 
the members of this Assembly. I have a few introductions that I 
will get through here, Mr. Speaker, but it is my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of this 
Legislative Assembly, with us today, Mr. Speaker, is Mr. Kasi 
Rao, the president and chief executive officer of the 
Canada-India Business Council. Mr. Rao is accompanied today 
by Jodi Banks, the acting deputy minister of Trade and Export 
Development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to sit down with him earlier 
today, and we had a great discussion on a range of issues. There 
are few people in Canada better informed about India, Mr. 
Speaker, than Mr. Rao. Mr. Rao is a consultant and an adviser 
to corporations, to governments, to universities, as well as to 
non-profit organizations. And for many years he has served as a 
vice-president and director for the Asia Pacific Foundation in 
Toronto. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Rao is very familiar with 
Saskatchewan, and he’s a good friend to our province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there can be no doubt that deepening engagement 
with Asia in general, and with India in particular, must be a 
priority for our province. India is one of the fastest growing 
nations in the world, and today it is Saskatchewan’s 
third-largest export market. Last year alone we shipped more 
than $1.1 billion worth of goods to the nation of India. That 
total included more than $700 million worth of pulse crops. 
Saskatchewan is India’s largest supplier of both lentils and 
peas. Our potash shipments to India have rose by nearly 50 per 
cent last year compared to the year before. And of course, 
Cameco continues to ship Saskatchewan uranium to India. But 
we have much more than that. 
 
There are 20 educational agreements that are in place, and more 
people from India are calling this province home. In the last 
decade, we welcomed nearly 15,000 newcomers to the province 
of Saskatchewan from the nation of India. And those folks, I 
would put forward, are making our province and our 
communities stronger through the businesses that they operate, 
the families that they are raising, and through the culture and 
language that they share with us. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m optimistic that our partnership with India will 
only get stronger as the years go by. I’m grateful for the advice 
and the guidance provided by Mr. Rao, among a host of others, 
as we work to strengthen that partnership, to make that 
synergistic relationship even stronger. Mr. Speaker, I would ask 
all members to join me in welcoming Mr. Kasi Rao to the 
Assembly here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, it brings me great pleasure 
to introduce some very important guests who are visiting our 
Saskatchewan Assembly here today. With us are representatives 
from the executive committee of the Pacific NorthWest 
Economic Region organization, better known as PNWER. 
 
Members of the delegation include — and I’d ask you to give a 
wave as I mention your name — Senator Arnie Roblan, an 
Oregon state senator and the current president of PNWER; Matt 
Morrison, the chief executive officer of PNWER; Mike Cuffe, 
Montana state representative and the vice-president of PNWER; 
Shawna Argue, Saskatchewan’s private sector representative to 
PNWER, and she is also the director of registration with the 
Association of Professional Engineers and Geoscientists here in 
Saskatchewan; and Brandon Hardenbrook, PNWER’s deputy 
director and chief operating officer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, PNWER is a public-private partnership of 
governments, businesses, and non-governmental organizations 
from the northwest region of our continent of North America. 
Mr. Speaker, this is a diverse membership with a common 
cause: to promote growth, to promote competitiveness through 
regional collaboration, and the reduction of trade and regulatory 
barriers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our guests have a busy program while they visit 
Regina here. They’ll meet with the Lieutenant Governor, a 
number of cabinet ministers, with representatives from 
Saskatchewan’s Trade and Export Partnership, and I look 
forward to meeting with our guests later this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has been an active and engaged 
member of PNWER. The Minister of Agriculture served as 
their president in 2012-2013. And this July the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford, the current vice-president of PNWER, will 
take over as president, and we know he will do a terrific job in 
that role. 
 
Mr. Speaker, PNWER makes a significant contribution to the 
strong and enduring partnership of our two great nations, and I 
would ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
welcoming our guests to the legislature here today. 
 
And last but certainly not least, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, three people, three and a half people actually: 
Richard Billington, Susan Billington, Courtney Billington, Mr. 
Speaker, and little baby Billington that will be with us here in 
July. Mr. Speaker, both Richard and Susan have been lawyers 
in Calgary for about 30 years, and they have a long-standing 
passion for federal and provincial politics and all things good 
for Western Canada and our nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have a special tie to this legislature as their 



4284 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2018 

son is my director of comms, Jim Billington, Mr. Speaker. And 
I hear they’ve resigned theirself to the fact that Jim will forever 
be a Saskatchewan Roughriders fan, not a Calgary Stampeders 
fan, as it goes through the next generation as well, Mr. Speaker. 
And Courtney has called Saskatchewan home for the last three 
years. Courtney also is very special, has a special connection to 
the legislature, as Jim proposed to her in the rotunda just before 
Christmas in 2015, Mr. Speaker. And they obviously weren’t 
quite busy enough in the most recent leadership race, Mr. 
Speaker, as they’ll be expecting their young daughter here in 
July, adding to the population of our great province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I ask all members to welcome Richard, Susan, and Courtney 
Billington to the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure today 
to join with the Premier in welcoming a number of special 
guests to your gallery. First of all, I’d like to welcome Mr. Kasi 
Rao, the CEO [chief executive officer] of the Canada-India 
Business Council, and welcome you on behalf of the official 
opposition and all members here today. I think it’s very 
important that we acknowledge and celebrate the very important 
friendship and the very important trade relationship that takes 
place between India and our province, and welcome you here 
today and thank you for your expertise and your work in 
extending that friendship and that relationship. 
 
I would also like to join with the Premier in welcoming some 
guests from PNWER to our Legislative Assembly. The member 
from Regina Rosemont and I had an opportunity to meet briefly 
with this group and have a little time over lunch and really 
welcomed the conversation and the relationships that were built 
there. And I’m sure that will only continue to grow.  
 
With us, as has been mentioned, Senator Roblan from Oregon; 
Mr. Morrison from PNWER; Representative Cuffe; and 
Shawna Argue, as has been mentioned, with APEGS 
[Association of Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of 
Saskatchewan] and the private sector representative; former 
Senator Brenden; and Mr. Hardenbrook, deputy director and 
chief operating officer with PNWER. Of course, accompanying 
them today, Ms. Carter and Ms. Harder. 
 
I know that there’s an exciting summit coming up soon in 
Seattle, which the member from Saskatoon Fairview is 
delighted to be able to attend. And next year, to all members, 
we are looking forward to the summit coming here to Saskatoon 
and really looking forward to this continued relationship, this 
opportunity to meet together and to deepen our knowledge, best 
practices, around issues that face all jurisdictions in the Pacific 

Northwest. 
 
And I really welcome the opportunity to meet with you today 
and look forward to an ongoing relationship. I invite all 
members to join me in welcoming these guests to their 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, in my brief comments at the 
outset I was remiss and I missed one of our guests, Mr. Speaker, 
one of our individuals, one of our former senators from the state 
of Montana that’s been involved with PNWER and been 
involved with trade relations and a relationship among, you 
know, nation to nation if you will, and state to province, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s former senator Mr. John Brenden from the 
state of Montana, Mr. Speaker. And I apologize for not having 
you in my opening comments. 
 
And I want to thank all of those within PNWER, Mr. Speaker, 
for the effort and initiative on both sides of the border to 
continue with the great relationship that Saskatchewan and 
Canada have with states across the United States and the United 
States itself. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to this Assembly, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
some guests in your gallery, Mr. Speaker: representatives from 
the Saskatchewan Dietitians Association, the Dietitians of 
Canada, and the University of Saskatchewan’s nutrition 
program. 
 
We have with us — and I ask them to each give a wave as I 
introduce you — Lana Moore, who is registrar with the 
Saskatchewan Dietitians Association; Jennifer Wojcik, regional 
executive director with Dietitians of Canada; and Jessica 
Lieffers, assistant professor with the College of Pharmacy and 
Nutrition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they will be meeting later this afternoon with the 
Minister of Rural and Remote Health and myself, and they’re 
also hosting a reception at 5 o’clock today for members on both 
sides of the Assembly. We thank them for that. Look forward to 
seeing them there. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to 
please give them a warm welcome to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to join 
briefly with the minister in welcoming these guests to their 
Assembly today, the delegation of dietitians, and certainly look 
forward to the reception this evening. I know we’ll all be 
paying close attention to the fare that’s spread out before us. 
I’m sure that it will be perfectly balanced and beneficial to all of 
us. I do welcome each of you on behalf of the official 
opposition and all members to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Martensville. 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, it’s an honour today to introduce 32 grade 8 students from 



May 14, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4285 

Venture Heights School in Martensville. They are accompanied 
by their teachers Tanya Robertson and Karen Heit and 
chaperones Michelle Leitch, Joelle Ward, Del Lennea, and Don 
Giesbrecht. It’s been, I think, probably at least two years since 
I’ve had a school group, so I’m pretty excited about meeting 
with them after question period. And I would ask all my 
colleagues to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to welcome 
a group of 17 students from grade 8, Riverside School in Prince 
Albert. Mr. Speaker, it’s not very often that we get a group from 
Prince Albert, and this is my very first school group so I’m 
pretty excited to meet up with them too and get to find out all 
the questions that they have. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity to go to Riverside School a few times, 
and those students always have the best questions and are really 
prepared, and their teachers do a great job talking to them about 
government and our roles. They’re also accompanied by their 
teachers Jordan Holmen and Tanya Vancoughnett. So I’m 
looking forward to spending some time with the teachers and 
the students this afternoon, and I ask that all members welcome 
them to their legislature. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
to present a petition in support of mental health and addiction 
services in the North. Northern Saskatchewan has some of the 
highest suicide rates in the country. The Children’s Advocate 
has put out a report stating the lack of services in the North. The 
suicide rate is six times higher for First Nation boys than 
non-First Nation boys between the age of 10 and 19, and 26 
times higher for First Nation girls than non-First Nation girls. 
 
I will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to treat northern Saskatchewan 
residents with respect and dignity and to immediately 
invest in more mental health and wellness programs and 
facilities in the North. 

 
It is signed and supported by many good people of the province. 
I so present. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Moose Jaw. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition to get big money out of Saskatchewan politics. And 
the undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan want 
to bring to our attention the following: that Saskatchewan’s 
outdated election Act allows corporations, unions, and 
individuals, even those outside the province, to make unlimited 
donations to our province’s political parties; that the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve to live in a fair province where all voices 
are equal and money can’t influence politics. And we know, 
Mr. Speaker, that over the past 10 years the Saskatchewan Party 
has received $12.61 million in corporate donations and of that, 
$2.87 million come from companies outside Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan politics should belong 
to Saskatchewan people, and we know that the federal 
government and the provinces of Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, 
Nova Scotia, and now British Columbia have moved to limit 
this influence and level the playing field by banning corporate 
and union donations to political parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan call on the Sask 
Party to overhaul Saskatchewan campaign finance laws, to 
end out-of-province donations, to put a ban on donations 
from corporations and unions, and to put a donation limit 
on individual donations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for critical workplace supports for 
survivors of domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has 
the dubious distinction of having the highest rates of intimate 
partner violence amongst all of the provinces, and we know that 
we must do much more to protect those who experience 
domestic violence. 
 
For many the violence will follow them to their workplace. 
That’s why the signatories to this petition are calling for five 
days of paid leave and up to 17 weeks of unpaid leave be made 
available to workers who are survivors of domestic violence, 
and that critical workplace supports made available to survivors 
of domestic violence should also be made available to workers 
living with post-traumatic stress disorder as a result of that 
intimate partner violence. 



4286 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2018 

Mr. Speaker, this is what those who are on the front lines of this 
crisis are calling for. PATHS [Provincial Association of 
Transition Houses and Services of Saskatchewan] is one 
organization that has specifically called for this, as well as the 
YWCA [Young Women’s Christian Association] of Regina. 
The impact to businesses is minimal financially, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is what we’ve called for in our private member bill, 
Bill No. 609, the fourth time we’ve put forward that provision 
in this House in the last two years. It’s time for the government 
to step up and pass that private member’s bill. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call upon 
the Sask Party government to pass legislation to ensure 
critical supports in the workplace, including reasonable 
accommodation and paid and unpaid leave for survivors of 
domestic violence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition today come 
from Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
present a petition around Orkambi. Whereas Orkambi’s the first 
drug to treat the basic defect in the largest population of 
Canadians with cystic fibrosis. It can slow the disease 
progression, allowing patients to live longer, healthier lives. 
 
The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan urge the Ministry of Health to negotiate a 
fair price for Orkambi and to make it available through the 
Saskatchewan drug plan for those who meet the conditions 
set by Health Canada and the clinical criteria established 
by Canadian CF clinicians. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the many, many, 
many pages of petitions that I have presented over the last 
couple of years have been all throughout Saskatchewan and 
throughout Canada. And on the page that I’m presenting today, 
they are primarily from St. Brieux, Lloydminster, and Naicam. I 
so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Sikh Society Celebrates Vaisakhi 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this past weekend, 
together with my family, I was honoured to attend the third 
annual Sikh Day parade here in the Queen City, along with the 
Leader of the Official Opposition, members from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre, Douglas Park, Lakeview, yourself as 
Speaker, and members from the opposite side as well. 
 
Saturday’s parade was filled with bright colour and sharing of 
culture and faith. The parade is part of the harvest festival 

known as Vaisakhi. After an opening prayer at the temple, the 
crowd of hundreds began to walk towards the legislature, where 
thousands more joined together in celebration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the parade is an opportunity to come together, but 
also to educate people about Sikhism. Several activities were 
open to the public, including free food, “served in the spirit of 
love, compassion, and selfless service,” and Gatka, which is a 
form of martial arts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve learned that love is the main message of 
Sikhism — to love everybody, to help everybody, give 
generously, and live together peacefully. I was pleased to once 
again share in this powerful expression of the strength offered 
by our diversity and proudly putting our provincial motto, 
“from many peoples, strength,” on full display. I ask all 
members to join with me in recognizing and thanking the 
organizers of this great day, all those that made it such a great 
success. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

Sexual Assault Awareness Week 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to acknowledge May 14th to the 18th as Sexual Assault 
Awareness Week here in the province. Sexual assault is a 
horrific act and its effects are widespread. 
 
Our government takes this issue very seriously and has been 
investing in supports for those who have been victimized. Just 
recently our government launched the Listen Project in 
partnership with the Public Legal Education Association. The 
Listen Project provides two hours of free legal advice to 
survivors of sexual violence, with an additional two hours 
depending on the circumstances. There will be an important 
direct support for victims of sexual assault. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government also provides an additional 1.2 
million annually to seven sexual assault service programs 
across Saskatchewan. These include centres in The Battlefords, 
Lloydminster, Regina, Saskatoon, Yorkton, and Prince Albert. 
These centres provide services including 24-hour crisis 
telephone lines; support and accompanying individuals to 
medical, legal, and social service appointments; and providing 
information, referrals, and public education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sexual assault is a problem, and we need to 
continue to bring awareness to it. While our government 
continues to take this issue very seriously, there is more work to 
be done. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly 
join me in acknowledging Sexual Assault Awareness Week. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Vigil Held in Prince Albert for Missing Persons 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Wednesday, 
May 2nd, Prince Albert North Search and Rescue organization 
held a vigil in honour of missing persons in and around Prince 
Albert and throughout Saskatchewan. There are 128 open cases 



May 14, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4287 

of missing persons in Saskatchewan, and some have been 
missing for a long time, including Mekayla Bali, a young lady 
from Yorkton that has been missing for over two years. 
 
Nine empty chairs shared the stage with speakers to represent 
the nine missing persons on Prince Albert Police Service’s 
active files. The names of the nine missing persons were read 
out to remind us that families are still missing their loved ones 
and that they continue to suffer, not knowing what has become 
of their family member. 
 
Speakers at the vigil included people from the Prince Albert 
Police Service, victim services, and the Saskatchewan Council 
of Women and the Prince Albert North Search and Rescue. As 
well, members of the Prince Albert Fire Department were in 
attendance. 
 
Prince Albert North’s Search And Rescue is a group of 
volunteers who are called into action when someone goes 
missing. They’re not paid, but are all trained to a professional 
standard in search and rescue operations. As well, they are 
trained to educate the public, especially children, on what to do 
if they get lost or go missing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in thanking 
the Prince Albert Search and Rescue for the good work they do 
when someone goes missing, and for organizing the vigil in 
Prince Albert. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Pasqua. 
 

Sikh Society Parade 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I attended 
the Sikh Society of Regina annual parade last Saturday, along 
with the Deputy Premier of Saskatchewan, the Minister of 
Advanced Education, the minister of sports and culture, the 
member from Walsh Acres, the member from Rochdale, and of 
course yourself as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the parade started from Gurudwara Sahib, reached 
in front of the Legislative Building, stayed here for a couple of 
hours, and paraded back to Gurudwara Sahib. Mr. Speaker, with 
the parade we had the Sikh Motorcycle Club wearing Humboldt 
Broncos T-shirts to pay the tribute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sikhism is rooted in the teaching of equality, 
unity, selfless service, and social justice. Celebrations such as 
this parade build better understanding and help us build and 
maintain lasting relationships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, around Regina the phrase “Sikh values and 
Canadian values” was displayed leading up to the event. The 
parade was an opportunity to come together in celebration and 
also educate people about the Sikh religion and values. Several 
activities were enjoyed by thousands in attendance, including 
free vegetarian food, a turban-tying experience, and Gatka, 
which is Sikh martial arts. Thank you to all the participants, 
speakers, and public service members who organized the parade 
and events. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members to join me congratulating 
the Sikh Society of Regina on another successful event. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 

Emergency Medical Services Workers Recognized 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I, along 
with the Minister of Rural and Remote Health and the member 
from Moose Jaw Wakamow, attended the Saskatchewan 
emergency measures service organization’s annual convention, 
held in Moose Jaw. 
 
The conference was an opportunity for EMS [emergency 
medical services] providers and administrators to meet and 
share their passion for their field. It was also an opportunity to 
discuss different ways to meet the health needs of communities 
and of our citizens. In the aftermath of the Humboldt Broncos 
accident, we are reminded again of the tireless and 
compassionate care that our EMS teams provide this province 
24-7. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is good to see the increased awareness and 
attention that is being paid to the traumatic impact that 
responding to emergencies can have on individuals. It is 
assuring to know that the EMS organizations take this issue 
seriously and promote use of the supports that are available to 
the men and women who serve this province so well. Mr. 
Speaker, we sleep better at night knowing that the trained 
professionals are on duty and ready to respond to health 
emergencies and provide preliminary health care and services to 
our community. 
 
I ask everyone in this Assembly to join me in congratulating the 
EMS providers on a successful convention as well as thanking 
them for everything they do every day. We are truly grateful for 
each and every one of them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Constituent Helps Team Canada Win Bronze 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise in the 
House today to acknowledge the achievement of a young 
constituent of mine. Taylor Kirwan is a 17-year-old hockey 
player from Gull Lake, and she just recently won a bronze 
medal for Team Canada in the under-18 world championship in 
Russia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from the onset of the tournament, Taylor and 
Team Canada knew they would be challenged. Facing crowd 
noise so loud the players couldn’t hear their coaches or each 
other on the ice, they dropped the first game to Russia. Team 
Canada also lost to the US [United States] in the preliminary 
round. But in a typical Canadian fashion, they rallied back and 
made it to the semifinals. In a hard-fought semifinal game 
against the US, they fell in a shootout. 
 
Unfortunately, Taylor suffered a concussion in the quarter-final 
win against the Czech Republic and was unable to participate in 
that game. As the team’s top penalty killer, this was a 
significant blow. Despite her absence, Team Canada was able to 
defeat Russia and secure a bronze. 



4288 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2018 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate Taylor and Team Canada 
on the bronze medal win and wish them continued success in 
their hockey careers. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
University. 
 

UnderstandUs Launches Me to You Campaign 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Today I want to highlight a constituent of mine, Jim 
Demeray, who for seven years has been a beacon of light and 
support for our youth struggling with their mental health 
barriers. 
 
Jim is the president of UnderstandUs, which is a voluntary 
initiative that focuses on combating the stigma of mental health 
while providing education and support to our youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week, to a sold-out crowd, the newest 
UnderstandUs campaign, entitled Me to You, was unveiled. A 
powerful message was delivered through a video production 
wherein kids expressed their thoughts or situations that make 
them feel very vulnerable, worried, or stressed. And then in 
response, adults who had gone through similar experiences gave 
messages of hope and empowerment, letting them know they 
were supported, and they are not alone. If only we could all 
have the opportunity to encourage a young person who is 
struggling. 
 
The video, produced by Strategy Lab, starred children from 
grade 7 and 8 at St. Gregory School in Regina and has had over 
13,000 views in the last two weeks. Mr. Speaker, UnderstandUs 
and its founder, Jim Demeray, have been working with the good 
people at Strategy Lab to find creative ways to elevate this 
important conversation. Mr. Speaker, the world needs more of 
this, and we want to congratulate UnderstandUs for leading the 
way. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Teacher Salaries 
 
Ms. Beck: — Last week we asked the Sask Party government if 
they planned on fully funding the contracts for teachers who 
work in our kids’ classrooms. It was like a trip down memory 
lane, Mr. Speaker. The minister wouldn’t commit and he 
wouldn’t assure school divisions that increases in teachers’ 
salaries would have to be made up for with cuts to the 
classroom. And if you thought the Sask Party government 
would have learned their lesson from the last time funding 
teachers’ salaries was an issue, well you would have been 
wrong. 
 
School divisions shouldn’t have to go digging through the 
cushions to cover the increase in teachers’ salaries. The 
government is the one who negotiates, who sets the mill rates, 
and who has all of the control. Why won’t the Sask Party 
government fully commit to fully funding the new teachers’ 
contract? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I was very 
clear about this last week. Mr. Speaker, there is no contract at 
this point in time. Mr. Speaker, we’re in arbitration. We’ll be 
having those discussions through arbitration, Mr. Speaker. And 
once a contract . . . Once a contract is concluded, Mr. Speaker, 
then we’ll have a conversation on this side of the House with 
respect to how we’re going to fund that contract, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But at this point in time we’re currently in the middle of going 
through the current year’s budget, Mr. Speaker. And as I say, 
once that arbitrated settlement has come to pass, Mr. Speaker, 
then we’ll have a conversation about how that’s going to be 
funded. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, that answer simply is not good 
enough. The Premier and the Education minister ran their 
leadership campaigns on resetting the relationship with 
teachers. But there’s been no reset. They’ve shown through 
their actions that they have nothing more to offer than more of 
the same. They won’t commit to fully funding teachers’ 
contracts and they still haven’t restored the funding that they 
cut from last year’s budget. 
 
Our educators and students deserve so much better than what 
they’re getting from this Sask Party government. Teachers and 
parents know that investment in our children’s education is an 
investment in all of our futures. When will the Sask Party 
government do the right thing and fully fund, commit to fully 
funding today, those teachers’ contracts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has shown its commitment to public education. 
Seven and a half million dollars in in-year funding, Mr. 
Speaker, for the $30 million, the annualized part of that, Mr. 
Speaker, in this year’s budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we continue to have conversations with trustees. 
We continue to have conversations with teachers. It’s our 
commitment to make sure that we meet the challenges in the 
classroom, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as far as resetting the relationship, Mr. Speaker, I can tell 
you this. I’ve been out talking to trustees. I’ve been out talking 
to teachers, Mr. Speaker. They’re pleased with the response that 
this government has taken with respect to funding education, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
More to do? No question, Mr. Speaker, more to do. And we’re 
going to continue to have those conversations because we know 
that the future of this province, Mr. Speaker, the future of our 
economy is dependent on making sure that we educate our 
children in the classroom, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to 
continue to work with our partners in education. And I’ve been 
emphasizing that with whoever I speak to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 



May 14, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4289 

Job Numbers and Provincial Economy 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Last Thursday, a small business owner said that 
the Sask Party government’s decision to shut down saskjobs.ca 
website was “brutal.” And that’s probably the best choice of 
words to describe last Friday’s job numbers as well. While 
provinces across the country saw significant job growth, 
Saskatchewan lost 1,800 jobs since this time last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan was the only province other than 
Newfoundland and Labrador that didn’t see any job growth, and 
Saskatchewan was dead last. So I want to ask the minister, 
who’s been boasting about job creation, what he has to say 
about 1,800 fewer jobs in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. And the 
reality is that this economy has created 62,000 jobs over the 
course of the last decade, Mr. Speaker. And we have 
acknowledged that there are headwinds in the economy, that 
there are headwinds in the labour market, largely caused by the 
national government. We are having significant challenges 
getting our products to market, Mr. Speaker. Whether that be 
through the rail transportation system, whether that be through 
pipelines, Mr. Speaker, there have been challenges. 
 
There are also challenges created by uncertainty with regard to 
a carbon tax, Mr. Speaker, a carbon tax supported by the Leader 
of the Opposition. And I would note as well, a carbon tax, when 
pushed on this matter, the critic who just asked the question 
said that she did not support her leader’s position, Mr. Speaker. 
She stated this at estimates only about two weeks ago. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I would challenge her on the issue of the carbon tax. If 
she doesn’t support her leader’s position, if she doesn’t stand 
with Justin Trudeau, does she stand with this government and 
stand with the people of this province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Mowat: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has been lagging 
behind other provinces for months, and the minister knows that. 
Now our province has the highest unemployment rate outside of 
Atlantic Canada — 3,500 fewer jobs it lost in trade; 6,400 jobs 
lost in scientific and technical services, and Alberta 
construction companies advertising for Alberta jobs in 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder people are leaving our province to 
find opportunities elsewhere. The Sask Party government cut $3 
million in job training and workforce development, and for 
weeks they defended their cut to the SaskJobs website. Now 
we’re happy to see that they reversed their short-sighted cut in 
the interim, but with more and more people losing their jobs, 
can the minister at the very least commit that he will stop 
making decisions that make it harder and harder for 
Saskatchewan people to find work? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well the member opposite cited 
Alberta. I would point to the fact that Alberta continues to have 

a higher unemployment rate than Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
Alberta also had a highly significantly larger loss of jobs over 
the course of the last couple of years, Mr. Speaker, and like I 
said we’ve acknowledged that there are headwinds in the labour 
market. And the last thing this economy needs and the labour 
market needs is a massive new tax on everything, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I gave her a chance and I hope she’ll take an opportunity in her 
next question to respond to whether she supports her leader’s 
position — which she said that she didn’t, Mr. Speaker — on 
the carbon tax, or whether she stands with this government. 
 
I would also ask the member for Rosemont, for instance, who I 
think is generally regarded as perhaps being the most in tune 
with economic questions of members opposite, whether he 
supports his leader’s position, Mr. Speaker, whether he stands 
with his leader in support of a carbon tax, who was very careful 
in his language when he was the leader of the opposition with 
regard to a price on carbon. He never said he supported a 
carbon tax, so perhaps he’ll get up, Mr. Speaker, and make clear 
whether he supports this side of the House standing for the 
people of this province or whether he stands with Justin 
Trudeau. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Release of Information on Global Transportation Hub 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday the Justice 
minister shared with the House that lawyers from the Ministry 
of Justice had been deployed to the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] to help them comply with the 
recommendations of the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner. He said they were there “trying to make sure 
that they do comply fully, that they deal with things in a proper 
and expeditious manner.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, doing things fully and in a proper and expeditious 
manner means following the recommendations of the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner. He is an independent 
officer of this Assembly and he has already reviewed all the 
files. And he found, “I find that neither GTH nor Brightenview 
has demonstrated to my office that there are objective grounds 
for believing there is a reasonable expectation of harm if the 
information was disclosed.” 
 
When will the Sask Party government do the right thing, the 
easy thing, and release these documents? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 
member opposite, we have a process and a procedure. It’s 
prescribed in the legislation. We don’t release documents; 
they’re released by the head of the agency that they’re requested 
from. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite know that. 
 
And we expect the documents to be gone through an 
appropriate vetting process to determine what is commercially 
sensitive, what is not. And we expect the officials at the GTH 
will work with the officials from the Privacy Commissioner and 
the Ministry of Justice to make sure that they’re well guided in 



4290 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2018 

their decision. 
 
These are not decisions that anyone on this side of the House is 
going to make. Those are decisions that will be made there. And 
I would encourage the members opposite to stay tuned. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, despite what that minister just 
said, last week the minister said that when it comes to deciding 
what records to release, “the ultimate responsibility lies with 
government.” That’s the problem, Mr. Speaker. The 
responsibility rests with the government, but we can’t rely on 
them to follow the law. They failed to follow the law and 
release the Husky pipeline inspection records, and they’ve 
offered no assurances that they’ll release all the GTH records 
the commissioner has told them to. 
 
The commissioner has read over these records, and he’s decided 
which documents should be public and which should be 
withheld. People can have confidence in his office’s findings. 
He’s an independent officer, and he has nothing to hide. And 
when he says a record should be made public, the government 
should be forced to comply. 
 
Does the minister agree with me and the members on this side 
of the House that it’s time to give the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner the power to order governments to release 
documents? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in the situation with 
Husky, the Crown prosecutor made recommendations, made 
determinations. Once again, once again we do not interfere with 
the decisions that are made by the officials. Mr. Speaker, we 
create the legislation. We expect the legislation to be followed. 
We expect it to be followed carefully and appropriately. The 
officials at the GTH will work with the Privacy Commissioner 
to determine what documents are commercially sensitive and 
what documents aren’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite should spend more time at 
the GTH. Some of them have gone on a tour. I’d encourage the 
rest of them to go on a tour there, see the number of jobs that 
are created. Another one of the employers out there is Emterra, 
a recycling business that recycles for all of the city of Regina. 
They recycle all kinds of paper goods, not just leftover copies 
of the Leap Manifesto, but all kinds of things that end up out 
there. And we’d encourage the members out there to go and do 
more of a fulsome tour. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Donations to Political Parties 
 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our election laws 
don’t have any restrictions on payments from political parties to 
politicians. Sadly the electoral finance system in Saskatchewan 
is still the wild west. The laws are outdated and broken, and it’s 
unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. When it comes to out-of-province 
donations or big money, union and corporate donations, the 

Sask Party government seems to be content with keeping the 
status quo. Mr. Speaker, the legislation needs to be changed. 
 
So will the Attorney General work with us and help change our 
broken and horribly out-of-date election finance laws so we can 
get big money out of Saskatchewan politics? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
should have a look in the mirror a little bit more carefully 
before they start asking these kind of questions. In the last 
election, John Horgan and the British Columbia NDP [New 
Democratic Party] donated $7,519.60 to the NDP here, their 
21st largest donation received. I don’t know what idea . . . 
Where did that come from? What did they do? I don’t see them 
turning it down. I don’t seem them offering to give the money 
back. 
 
They also didn’t oppose accepting donations from unions: over 
81,000 from UFCW [United Food & Commercial Workers] 
Provincial Council; 54,000 from Unifor; 37,000 from United 
Steelworkers; $35,000 from the Canadian Labour Congress. 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite regularly receive these 
donations. They make the donations. And, Mr. Speaker, they 
should have a little bit of a look in the mirror, consult with 
themselves a bit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, that minister just doesn’t get it. 
He doesn’t get it. Like so many issues in this province, this 
Sask Party government would rather stick their heads in the 
sand . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Just looking for a little order. I recognize the 
member. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, over the past 10 years the 
Saskatchewan Party has received $12.61 million in corporate 
donations, and of that, 2.87 million — let me say that again: 
million — dollars have come from companies out of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan politics should belong to 
Saskatchewan people. We can do politics differently in 
Saskatchewan. We should be leading the country, not last. Not 
last. To the minister: why can’t we work collaboratively? Will 
he support our bill, The Election (Fairness and Accountability) 
Amendment Act, and help us get big money out of 
Saskatchewan politics? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have got Saskatchewan 
expatriates that are living in other provinces that still carry on 
business here. Mr. Speaker, we have businesses that carry on all 
the way across Western Canada. Mr. Speaker, all donations 
over $250 are publicly reported as required by The Elections 



May 14, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4291 

Act. The opposition claims that the Sask Party is funded by a 
few larger . . . but that, Mr. Speaker, is not the case. 
 
In 2017 over 26,000 individuals donated to the Sask Party. The 
average donation was $65. About a thousand corporations 
donated. Their average donation was $1,000 each. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a matter of public record. The members opposite are entitled 
to look at it, as we are with the union donations or the other 
donations that they received from John Horgan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 

Support for Mental Health in the North 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, supports for mental health and 
addictions in the North are not adequate. Northerners were very 
disappointed with what came from the government side during 
the 75-minute debate. Northerners face real barriers and real 
challenges when it comes to accessing mental health and 
addictions support, and those barriers are different than they are 
in Saskatoon and Regina. The front-line workers in northern 
communities are doing all they can with limited resources, but 
they need more. And the government should partner with the 
Lac La Ronge Indian Band, and help them build a wellness 
centre. 
 
When will the Sask Party government increase mental health 
and addictions support for the North? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, as most members know, 
mental health and addictions support comes through the former 
regional health authorities, now through the Saskatchewan 
Health Authority, Mr. Speaker. And as I pointed out in this 
House before, the previous northern health regions in this 
province have enjoyed increases in the 50, 60, 70, and 80 per 
cent ranges, where the rest of the province, in less than 50 per 
cent range, Mr. Speaker. So that shows, although we do still 
have issues to address in the North, it shows that we have been 
paying attention, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And some of those monies have gone towards things like 
suicide prevention protocols that have been fully implemented 
in northern mental health and addiction service locations; 93 
staff trained in mental health first aid; 228 have received 
Applied Suicide Intervention Skills that gets delivered in 
schools; 46 have been trained in safeTALK [safe tell, ask, listen 
and keep safe]. The Saskatchewan Health Authority employs a 
community suicide prevention coordinator. Also northern 
medical services coordinates visiting psychiatric services, Mr. 
Speaker. Other organizations have been set out so that first, one 
phone call, one contact access can be used to find all kinds of 
different services, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to give more on 
record of other questions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, those members can pat 
themselves on the back all they want, but the people on the 
front lines and in northern communities know that the funding 
isn’t nearly enough to meet the needs. More supports are 

needed and people are dying without the mental health and 
addiction services they need. When will the Sask Party 
government stop talking about mental health and addictions and 
finally deliver some action? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, by that member making 
a statement like that only discredits the hard work done by 
many Saskatchewan Health Authority people that are delivering 
top levels of service in the North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, four psychiatrists in Prince Albert provide 
services in La Ronge, Buffalo Narrows, Creighton and also 
through Telehealth. Two child and youth psychiatrists from 
Saskatoon provide visiting services in La Loche to follow up 
appointments through Telehealth, Mr. Speaker. A child 
psychiatrist in Prince Albert provides services through 
Telehealth. We have visiting service as well throughout the 
North on a scheduled basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as we have a number of times in the past, we’ve talked 
about a lot of these initiatives. Is there more work to do, Mr. 
Speaker? Absolutely. The members will always ridicule us for 
saying that, Mr. Speaker, but I think that’s why we’re in dire 
situations around this province, is because the NDP, when in 
power, thought that they had done enough. Mr. Speaker, we 
know we haven’t done enough. We’re going to continue to 
work on this file. 
 

Mental Health Services for Living Sky School Division 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, there are serious gaps in mental 
health supports for kids around this province, and with answers 
like that perhaps it’s not hard to see why. Years after the 
tragedy in La Loche the community is still calling for help, but 
they aren’t the only ones. North Battleford has been grappling 
with their own crisis in recent months. In just the month of 
January, three young people took their lives, and tragically two 
more youth suicides have been reported since. The community 
has developed an action plan in response to the rash of suicides 
and they’re beginning to see positive changes. 
 
Living Sky School Division is calling for help from the 
province to help build on their progress and to better support 
kids dealing with mental health concerns and the suicide crisis 
in their community. Has the minister reviewed their request for 
additional mental health resources? And can North Battleford 
count on this vital support? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that my 
deputy minister meets with the school division almost on a 
weekly basis to discuss this very issue, Mr. Speaker. And I 
know that the training for teachers in that school division with 
respect to mental health supports has gone up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re having conversations on this side of the House. I’ve 
spoken to my colleagues in the Ministry of Health, Mr. Speaker, 



4292 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2018 

about a pilot project that we’ve been looking at out of the 
province of Alberta to help enhance mental health services right 
in the classroom, right in the schools, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know there’s more work to do, Mr. Speaker, but we have 
done a significant amount of work over the last number of years 
with respect to supporting mental health in children, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve got over $30 million for over 400 counsellors 
and psychologists and social workers in our education system 
— 236 counsellors, 70 psychologists, 78 social workers, Mr. 
Speaker. We support programs like the Kids Help Line, 
anti-bullying resources, and mental health first aid training, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And just two weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, I had a conversation with 
some individuals out of Alberta to look for . . . to help us 
enhance those various resources in our classrooms, Mr. 
Speaker. We continue to work on this, Mr. Speaker. We know 
it’s very important. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, more ministers getting up and 
reading lists instead of actually listening to the people in the 
communities and understanding what is going on. 
 
The minister knows full well that the Living Sky School 
Division had to implement deep cuts following this 
government’s $54 million funding reduction in last year’s 
budget. They cut dozens of teachers, EAs [educational 
assistant], and support positions to deal with a $6 million 
shortfall. But it’s not done. This year the same school division 
is receiving $650,000 less than they did last year. The 
community is doing their best to address this issue and the 
school division is saying that they need extra support. 
 
This government claims that it wants to do better for kids 
grappling with mental illness. Well, Mr. Speaker, here’s an 
opportunity — one that has the potential to save lives. Will this 
government be funding additional mental health resources for 
kids in North Battleford in this time of need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned in my first 
answer, my deputy minister is in contact with the school 
division on an almost weekly basis, Mr. Speaker. I can also tell 
the member opposite that Kevin Cameron, who was the trauma 
expert that was on the ground in La Loche, Mr. Speaker, has 
been contracted by the North Battleford school division, and we 
funded that support, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s another example of the supports that we’re providing to 
make sure that our children are not just getting a proper 
education in the classroom, Mr. Speaker, but are safe and have 
the resources that they need to deal with the challenges that they 
face as young people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, there’s always more work to do. 
We’re committed to doing that work. I think some of the things 
that we’ve done, especially in the Northern Lights School 
Division, Mr. Speaker, and this particular school division, is a 
great example of the commitment that this government’s 

making. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Measures to Address Sexual Assault 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the 
second-highest per-capita rate of reported sexual violence in the 
country. And we know this isn’t the full picture. Sexual assaults 
remain the most under-reported violent crime in Canada, with 
as little as 5 per cent of incidents being reported to police. For 
survivors living in rural and remote areas and for those who are 
indigenous, the likelihood of gender-based violence is even 
higher. 
 
This isn’t a new issue for our province but it is one that is 
getting worse, while Saskatchewan remains the only province 
without a provincial sexual assault strategy. When can we 
expect a provincial strategy, and what is the government’s plan 
to better support the essential work being done on the front lines 
in the meantime? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I certainly 
agree. The member opposite has raised a concern, a concern 
that not only can but should affect everybody in this province. 
Everybody in this province should take the issue seriously and 
want to offer the supports and to do the things that are 
necessary and right. 
 
We have a report coming down in the next few days but, Mr. 
Speaker, I can tell the House some of the things that have 
happened already. We’ve passed the legislation this last year to 
allow for the breaking of a residential lease. We’ve also 
arranged to allow for 10 unpaid days for victims in violence and 
families to access services. 
 
We’re doing consultation now on Clare’s Law so that police 
can disclose potentially dangerous information about previous 
violent or abusive behaviour. We have got the Listen Project 
under way so that a survivor of sexual violence can receive up 
to two hours of free legal advice going on for a period of four 
years, Mr. Speaker. And those are the supports that we’re going 
to continue, and we will have more to say in the future. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 114 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hargrave that Bill No. 114 — The 
Vehicles for Hire Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 



May 14, 2018 Saskatchewan Hansard 4293 

Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure today 
to rise and enter into second reading debates on Bill No. 114, 
The Vehicles for Hire Act, Mr. Speaker. This is a bill that was 
introduced with a certain amount of fanfare, certainly is an issue 
that other jurisdictions have dealt with before we have here in 
Saskatchewan, and essentially deals with the ride-share 
companies — some of the commercial names being Uber and 
Lyft — that we have seen in other jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, numerous of my colleagues have had opportunity 
to enter into debate on this bill, and I do welcome the 
opportunity to add my thoughts before this bill goes into 
committee. One of the things that I want to touch upon is some 
of the claims that have been made, or assertions that have been 
made with regard to this bill, you know, important issues like 
drinking and driving and the impact that this may or may not 
have on what really are epidemic rates of drinking and driving 
in this province. 
 
And certainly members on this side welcome measures that 
have an impact at reducing those rates of drinking and driving, 
but we also really think it’s important that we look at best 
practices in evidence with regard to measures that are impactful, 
that do have the effect of actually reducing rates of drinking and 
driving. 
 
[14:30] 
 
And that’s a question that we have had and continue to have in 
terms of where this has been shown, ride-share technology, 
where it’s been shown to reduce rates of drinking and driving. 
And then of course the geography and distribution of population 
in Saskatchewan is a little bit unique in that we have so many 
kilometres of roads, such distance between communities, and 
such a relatively dispersed population across again a very, very 
large land mass. So those are some questions that we continue 
to have. 
 
More recently there’s been an assertion that this bill will help 
with providing transportation that has been lost with the loss of 
STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company]. That’s a 
relatively bold assertion, and one that I think before last week 
we hadn’t heard, but we’d be very curious to see if there’s 
evidence to that effect. 
 
I know there have been previous assertions that, you know, the 
private sector would move in and would ensure that all of those 
who lost service and lost the opportunity, the ability to get 
around the province when STC was wound down, that the 
private sector would step in. And what we’ve seen instead, Mr. 
Speaker, is a lot of, you know, some routes are there but there’s 
been a lot of uncertainty and certainly a lot of gaps around the 
province. So we’d be interested to hear what evidence there is 
and why those assertions are being made. 
 
Certainly no one is saying no to ride sharing. I know that 
various jurisdictions as well, various taxi companies have 
embraced the app for hailing cars. One big concern here is the 
lack of, or apparent lack of input from the existing taxi cab 
industry in the province and what this bill might have in terms 
of impact on that industry. We certainly have heard those 
concerns. But we’re also hearing that those groups don’t feel 
particularly well heard by the government, so we would like to 

raise some of those concerns. 
 
And then another issue is just around safety for all those who 
work in this industry, be it ride-share or within the existing taxi 
industry, on the risk that those people expose themselves to. 
How do we make sure that we get that right so that we’re not 
having, you know, in a few months or another year hearing a 
horrible accident, a horrible situation like we’ve heard in the 
last two previous years with regards to taxi drivers? 
 
And I think, you know, this represents a huge, a big change, and 
is not taken out of context with, you know, looking at a 
complete overhaul of the way that the taxi industry is treated, 
and bringing ride sharing as part of that. I know that that’s been 
a question that has been raised by a number of people, that 
maybe we’re missing opportunities to look at a suite of different 
legislation at the same time to ensure that we’re modernizing 
transportation in the province as more of a whole, rather than 
piecemeal, and certainly along our own timeline in this 
province, rather than perhaps timelines of other interests. 
 
But I know that we will have opportunity to speak to this bill in 
committee, and I look forward to touching back in with a 
number of the stakeholders. I know the municipalities have a 
big role to play, should this bill be passed, in creating their own 
licensing and bylaws for this industry, and I think that their 
voice is important here as well. So again, Mr. Speaker, I just 
wanted to get some of those questions and concerns on the 
record ahead of committee, but with that I am prepared to move 
the bill to committee. 
 
The Speaker: — Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the minister that Bill No. 114, The Vehicles for Hire Act be 
now read a second time. Pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — I designate that Bill No. 114, The 
Vehicles for Hire Act be committed to the Standing Committee 
on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So that the 
committees may continue their good work today, I move that 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved to 



4294 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2018 

adjourn for committees. Is it pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:36.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Moe ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4283, 4284 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4284 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4284 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4284 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4285 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4285 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4285 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4285 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4285 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4286 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Sikh Society Celebrates Vaisakhi 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 4286 
 Sexual Assault Awareness Week 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4286 
 Vigil Held in Prince Albert for Missing Persons 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4286 
 Sikh Society Parade 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 4287 
 Emergency Medical Services Workers Recognized 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 4287 
 Constituent Helps Team Canada Win Bronze 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 4287 
 UnderstandUs Launches Me to You Campaign 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 4288 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Funding for Teacher Salaries 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4288 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4288 
 Job Numbers and Provincial Economy 
  Mowat ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4289 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 4289 
 Release of Information on Global Transportation Hub 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4289 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4289 
 Donations to Political Parties 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 4290 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4290 
 Support for Mental Health in the North 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 4291 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 4291 
 Mental Health Services for Living Sky School Division 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4291 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 4291 
 Measures to Address Sexual Assault 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4292 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 4292 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 114 — The Vehicles for Hire Act 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 4293 
  Brkich (referral to Crown and Central Agencies Committee) ............................................................................................ 4293 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 
Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial  
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Power Corporation 

 
Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 

Minister of Energy and Resources 
Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Water Corporation 

 
Hon. Joe Hargrave 

Minister of Crown Investments 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 
 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Finance 

 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison 

Minister of Trade and Export Development 
Minister of Immigration and Career Training 

 
Hon. Warren Kaeding 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, Métis  

and Northern Affairs 

 
Hon. Gene Makowsky 

Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Liquor  

and Gaming Authority 
Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. David Marit 

Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 
Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds and  

Priority Saskatchewan 
 

Hon. Paul Merriman 
Minister of Social Services 

 
Hon. Don Morgan 

Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

Minister Responsible for The Global  
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications 

 
Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 

Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 
 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 
Hon. Lyle Stewart 

Minister of Agriculture 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 
 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Corrections and Policing 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan  
Gaming Corporation 

 
Hon. Gordon Wyant 

Deputy Premier 
Minister of Education 


